Anticipatory Action Framework

Fiji Tropical Cyclones – 2023
Approved by the RC on 3 November 2023
Endorsed by the USG/ERC OCHA on 13 November 2023

Table of Contents
1.

INTRODUCTION ........................................................................................................................................ 1

Coordination with local authorities ....................................................................................................................... 1
Risk/Hazard ......................................................................................................................................................... 2
Anticipatory action ............................................................................................................................................... 3
2.

THE MODEL: FORECASTS, TRIGGERS, AND ACTIVATION PROTOCOL ............................................ 4

Model/forecast ..................................................................................................................................................... 4
Trigger Conditions ............................................................................................................................................... 4
Trigger Monitoring Process ................................................................................................................................. 4
Activation protocol ............................................................................................................................................... 5
Challenges and potential improvements in the future ......................................................................................... 6
3.

THE ACTIVITIES: ACTIVITIES TO MITIGATE THE IMPACT OF TROPICAL CYCLONES ..................... 7

Overview .............................................................................................................................................................. 7
Selection Criteria ................................................................................................................................................. 7
Activities ............................................................................................................................................................... 7
Logistics ............................................................................................................................................................. 12
Challenges and potential improvements in the future ....................................................................................... 13
4.

THE MONEY: PRE-ARRANGED FINANCING ......................................................................................... 15

Financing overview ............................................................................................................................................ 15
Central Emergency Response Fund (CERF) .................................................................................................... 15
Co-Financing ..................................................................................................................................................... 16
Challenges and potential improvements in the future ....................................................................................... 16
5.

THE LEARNING ....................................................................................................................................... 18

6.

FINAL PROVISIONS ................................................................................................................................ 20

Advocacy and public communication ................................................................................................................ 20

i

ANNEX 1 – TRIGGER EVALUATION SPECIFICATION .................................................................................. 21
ANNEX 2 – HISTORICAL ANALYSIS ............................................................................................................... 21
ANNEX 3 – DISTRIBUTION LIST ..................................................................................................................... 22
ANNEX 4 – DRAFT TRIGGER MESSAGES .................................................................................................... 23
ANNEX 6 – OVERVIEW OF ACTIVITIES ......................................................................................................... 26
ANNEX 7 - CERF CHAPEAU AND PROJECT PROPOSALS (SEE CERF.UN.ORG) ..................................... 28
ANNEX 8 – DRAFT JOINT PRESS RELEASE RC-NDMO .............................................................................. 29

ii

1. Introduction
Pacific Island countries are among the most vulnerable to natural hazards exacerbated by climate change,
and there is a growing interest in scaling up anticipatory action in the region to support vulnerable
communities before a hazard strikes.
Following several years of piloting, OCHA is mainstreaming and scaling-up anticipatory action. In its 20232026 Strategic Plan, OCHA commits to “support and facilitate a systemic shift to coherent and embedded
anticipatory approaches, including anticipatory action. OCHA will use its own financing tools to facilitate,
generate evidence for and scale up collective anticipatory action.” OCHA implements this strategy – inter alia
– by facilitating coordinated, collective anticipatory action frameworks.
In March 2023 the Pacific Anticipatory Action Week brought together 15 governments and national/ regional
development partners in Nadi, Fiji. Following these discussions, Fiji was identified as a potential pilot for
coordinated anticipatory action financed through OCHA-managed pooled funds.
After close consultations with the Government and operational partners, the United Nations Resident
Coordinator for Fiji formally requested UN support for collective anticipatory action for tropical cyclones in Fiji.
Two weeks later, the Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency Relief Coordinator
approved the request, including pre-arranged CERF financing, encouraging the United Nations in country to
collaborate closely with the government; to build on existing systems; to identify co-financing; and to
document the impact of the pilot. Furthermore, the partners agreed to build on the existing resilience of
vulnerable populations.
This pilot builds on existing disaster risk management capacity of Fiji, including well established climate and
disaster risk governance, early warning systems and coordination structures. The need for enhanced early
warning and response to a range of hazards, including tropical cyclones, has been identified as priority in
national policy settings, including the National Adaptation Plan and National DRR policy. Fijis’ recent national
midterm review report on the implementation of the Sendai1 Framework for DRR also identified the need for
strengthened early warning system in the country, which further supports its inclusion as a pilot country under
the Early Warning for All initiative.
In line with best practices for anticipatory action to minimize and address the impact of sudden onset climaterelated disasters, this framework for coordinated anticipatory action to tropical cyclones in Fiji pre-agrees
when and on what basis there will be a trigger ahead of a specific storm; how much pre-arranged financing
will go to whom; and for what pre-agreed activities the funding will be used for. This framework also includes
provisions to document the impact of the pilot.

Coordination with local authorities
The National Disaster Management Act of 1998, supported by the National Disaster Management Office
(NDMO), provides a comprehensive legal framework for disaster management, emphasizing prevention,
preparedness, response, and recovery. The Early Warning System (EWS) plays a critical role in forecasting
and monitoring natural hazards, ensuring timely alerts to at-risk communities. Moreover, Fiji's efforts in
community-based disaster risk reduction and climate change adaptation programs underscore the
government's dedication to proactive disaster risk management.
The anticipatory action framework has been developed in close partnership with the Fiji government, under
the leadership of the NDMO in September 2023. The key components of the framework have been endorsed
by the National Disaster Management Council. The trigger mechanism and activation protocol have been
designed in collaboration with the Fiji Meteorological Service (FMS) and NDMO by building on existing
forecasting and Early Warning Systems (EWS). Activities are streamlined through the national cluster system.
Each partner agency collaborates closely with their respective national cluster co-leads, with a concerted
effort to implement activities through established government systems wherever possible.

1

ndmo.gov.fj/wp-content/uploads/2023/05/Fiji-Sendai-Mid-Term-Review-Report-2023.pdf

1

United Nations Office for Disaster Risk Reduction (UNDRR) supported the development of the Framework
through facilitating engagement with key government stakeholders, including NDMO and FMS, and ensured the
Framework is aligned with the existing disaster management system.

Risk/Hazard
Fiji is one of the most vulnerable countries in the world to tropical cyclones with significant impact on
infrastructure, the economy, and the Fijian people, displacing thousands, creating humanitarian suffering, and
causing loss of life.
Since 1969, there have been 33 TCs (Category 1 or higher) that have passed within 10 km of Fiji, and 16 that
made landfall. Some of the most devastating cyclones to hit Fiji in recent history include Cyclone Winston
(2016), the strongest cyclone ever recorded in the Southern Hemisphere, Cyclone Yasa (2020) which was the
second-strongest cyclone on record to make landfall in Fiji, and Cyclone Harold (2020). For these three most
recent storms, international support was mobilized, including financial support from the Central Emergency
Response Fund (CERF).
Climate change leading to warmer oceans is having a significant impact on tropical cyclones, making them
more frequent, intense, and destructive. In addition, climate change is also expected to lead to stronger storm
surges, more extreme rainfall events, and rising sea levels. Fiji’s government estimates (NDC) that by 2050,
over 6.5 per cent of Fiji’s GDP could be lost due to tropical cyclones and floods, with the number of people
being pushed into poverty every year increasing by 25 per cent. While the Government of Fiji has made
significant investments in disaster preparedness and resilience, the country remains at high risk from the loss
and damage caused by tropical cyclones.

2

Fiji's National Adaptation Plan (NAP) 2 and National DRR policy3 identifies tropical cyclones as a major climate
hazard that the country is facing and will continue to face in the future. The NAP outlines several measures
that Fiji can take to address the risks posed by tropical cyclones, including the building of community
resilience, as well as strengthening of early warning systems and disaster response preparedness.

Anticipatory action
By using early warning systems and scientific advances in predicting disasters, anticipatory action maximizes
the window of opportunity between the moment of prediction and the arrival of a specific forecasted shock to
trigger interventions that prevent or mitigate imminent humanitarian impacts.
Anticipatory action is defined as acting ahead of predicted hazards to prevent or reduce acute humanitarian
impacts before they fully unfold. Anticipatory action works best if triggers and decision-making rules (the
model) and activities (the delivery) are pre-agreed to guarantee the fast release of pre-arranged financing (the
money).
In line with best practices for anticipatory action, this framework pre-agrees the tropical cyclone forecasting
trigger and the activities which are launched thanks to pre-arranged financing. In addition, documenting
evidence and learning is part of the framework.

2
3

https://www4.unfccc.int/sites/NAPC/Documents/Parties/National%20Adaptation%20Plan_Fiji.pdf
https://www.ndmo.gov.fj/ndrrp/

3

2. The Model: Forecasts, triggers, and activation protocol
Model/forecast
Under the World Meteorological Organization’s Tropical Cyclone Programme, the Regional Specialized
Meteorological Centre (RSMC) in Nadi has the responsibility for detecting and forecasting tropical cyclones
(TCs) in its zone of responsibility, which is from the equator to 25°S and from 160°E to 120°W (spanning the
international date line)4. As such, RSMC Nadi’s TC forecasts are the internationally recognized authoritative
source for TCs in this zone. RSMC Nadi is operated by Fiji Meteorological Services (FMS).
RSMC Nadi issues official TC track forecasts with a 72-hour lead time, which include the TC’s forecasted
category and position, as well as 5-day TC formation risk outlooks. This framework uses the official 72-hour
track forecast for its action trigger. To provide more advance warning for implementation, this framework also
includes a readiness trigger, which is based on RSMC Nadi’s unofficial 120-hour forecast (an additional 48
hours)5.

Trigger Conditions
This framework will be triggered by a tropical cyclone that is forecasted by RSMC Nadi to be a:
•
•

Category6 4 or 5 while within 250 km of Fiji, or
Category 3, 4, or 5 while making landfall in Fiji.

Every time RSMC Nadi produces a tropical cyclone track forecast, it will be evaluated to determine whether
the trigger conditions have been met.
The framework follows a 2-stage trigger activation, each part of which is triggered based on the lead time of
the points in the forecast:
1. Readiness trigger: If any point in the 120-hour forecast meets the trigger conditions, the readiness
trigger is met.
2. Action trigger: If any point in the forecast up to a lead time of 72 hours meets the trigger conditions,
the activation trigger is met.
By definition, the action trigger has a detection rate of 100% (i.e., any cyclone whose actual track meets the
trigger conditions will cause the framework to activate). This is because the actual track of the cyclone is
effectively included in the forecast, as the forecasted position at a lead time of 0 hours.

Trigger Monitoring Process
Every tropical cyclone track forecast produced by RSMC Nadi is evaluated to determine whether the trigger
conditions have been met. The process involves the following steps:
1. A 120-hour forecast is produced by the Fiji Metrological Services Senior Scientific Officer on duty on
the Tropical Cyclone Forecasting Bench.
2.
The Officer emails the forecast, in its standardized CSV export format from the TC Module software to
the Data Science team at the OCHA Centre for Humanitarian Data.7
3. An automated script8 evaluates whether the trigger conditions have been met for either the readiness
trigger or the activation trigger.

4

https://community.wmo.int/en/tropical-cyclone-regional-bodies
Due to the relative uncertainty of the additional 48 hours of forecast, this part of the forecast is used only to determine whether the
readiness trigger has been met.
6
The Category in the Australian scale, corresponding to 10-minute sustained wind speeds of >107 kn for Cat 5, 86-107 kn for Cat 4, and
64-85 kn for Cat 3.
7
data.science@humdata.org
8
All code used for analysis in this framework is available publicly at https://github.com/OCHA-DAP/pa-aa-fji-storms
5

4

4. The automated script sends an email to the Distribution List defined in the Annex to notify that the
trigger has been met.
As a backup to the above steps, the Data Science team email will also be included on emails of the 72-hour
official forecast from RSMC Nadi to the NDMO, which happen after the 120-hour has been truncated to 72
hours (an already existing activity, undertaken for the NDMO to produce impact forecasts).
This process is outlined in the figure below.

Activation protocol
Who
RSMC Nadi / Fiji
Meteorological
Services
OCHA Centre for
Humanitarian
Data
NDMO

CERF

What
Send 120-hour forecast to
OCHA Centre for
Humanitarian Data
Evaluate whether trigger has
been met, and send email to
distribution list A
Share the trigger report to all
members of national clusters
involved
When a readiness trigger is
issued (or an action trigger
without a previous readiness
trigger), CERF will immediately
send the approval letters to the
agencies

RC

The RC can pause the
activation process upon
discussion with the NDMO

NDMO

The NDMO can discuss with
the RC if it is the case to
pause the activation

How
Email of CSV to
data.science@humdata.org
Using automated script

When
As soon as forecast is
produced, and before forecast
is truncated to 72 hours
Automatically as soon as
forecast CSV is received from
RSMC Nadi

Email by NDMO to
distribution list B (Annex 3)

As soon as notification of
trigger is received

Endorsed framework and
CERF application by RC and
Emergency Relief
Coordinator (ERC)

As triggers are reached

Pre-approved CERF approval
letters to UN agencies
Direct contact between RC
and NDMO (it can be
facilitated by OCHA HoO)
followed by email notification
to distribution list A (Annex 3)
Direct contact between RC
and NDMO (it can be
facilitated by OCHA HoO)

Once the framework is
activated, in the possible
outlier cases where a track of a
storm clearly would result in
minimal impact.
Once the framework is
activated, in the possible
outlier cases where a track of a

5

followed by email notification
to distribution list B (Annex 3)

storm clearly would result in
minimal impact.

To support geographic prioritization, OCHA CHD will produce an information email on the cyclone track (email
sample in the annex 5).

Any triggering of the framework should lead to action. However, for theoretically possible outlier cases where
a track of a storm clearly would result in minimal impact, the Resident Coordinator, in consultation with the
government, may pause any activation.

Challenges and potential improvements in the future
•
•
•

Need for impact-based forecasting after triggers are reached. This could start already but be improved
continuously.
Leadtime for action may be extremely short and thus more investment is needed in the science of
cyclone forecasting to increase lead-times and accuracy.
Tropical cyclones through the lens of windspeed is only one hazard resulting from storms, alongside
among other things rainfall and storm surge. Fiji faces other predicable hazards which are not
included in this anticipatory action framework. In the future, it was agreed to explore further how
rainfall could figure into a potential improved framework, while anticipatory action for other hazards
may also be explored.

6

3. The Activities: Activities to mitigate the impact of tropical cyclones
Overview
Tropical cyclones have a profound, devastating impact on communities in Fiji experiencing greatest
vulnerability. These populations, often living in precarious housing and lacking essential resources, bear the
brunt of disasters. While they possess the knowledge and skills to mitigate the impacts of cyclones, they often
lack the necessary materials and resources to effectively reduce their vulnerability to them.
There is only a very short window of opportunity between a trigger and impact of tropical cyclones in Fiji. In
addition, some areas are remote and difficult to access, especially with impeding storms. This combination
may create challenges to carry out anticipatory action in full before the impact of the cyclone. This is why the
partners have resolved to act as fast as possible and as anticipatory as possible once a trigger is reached.
However, in some circumstances, especially for remote areas, assistance may only reach communities after
the cyclone has passed, turning ex ante anticipatory action into ex-post early action.

Selection Criteria
Anticipatory actions aim to mitigate the impacts of out-of-the ordinary tropical cyclones by targeting those
people who face the greatest vulnerability. The following criteria were applied to select the pre-agreed
activities:
1. Anticipatory character: Is the action effective in preventing or reducing the humanitarian impact of the
shock?
2. Ability to deliver within the window of opportunity: Is it possible to carry out the action effectively with
the available forecast lead time, i.e. in the window of opportunity?
3. Operational capacity: Do the agency and its IPs have the institutional capacity (thematic, logistic,
administrative, financial, human resources) to implement the action effectively given the lead time and
scale?
4. No regrets approach: In the case of a false alarm, will the proposed actions benefit rather than
negatively affecting the targeted population?

Activities9
Activity 1. Multi-Purpose Cash co-lead by Ministry of Women, Children and Social Protection
(MWCSP) and WFP – Safety and Protection Cluster
Objective: Mitigate the impact of the cyclones on household food and nutrition security and general wellbeing
of their families.
Description: Given the short lead time, unconditional multi-purpose cash transfer (MPC) is a major
component of the framework. WFP, in partnership with the Ministry of Women, Children and Social Protection
(MWCSP), will support a projected 15,000 households (75,000 people) with anticipatory cash transfers in
areas identified to be in tropical cyclones path at the time of the activation trigger. A transfer value of FJD200
endorsed by the Fiji cash working group will be transferred by the DSP to targeted households. In the
absence of minimum expenditure basket, transfer value determination was based on the default transfer value
and aligned to Fiji basic needs poverty line.
WFP will channel resources through the government for provision of cash assistance to the existing
beneficiaries of social support schemes identified by the Government under four parts of the national social
protection scheme namely: 1) the Family Assistance Scheme, 2) the Care and Protection Allowance, 3) the
Disability Allowance and 4) the Social Pension Scheme. This MPC are designed to enable targeted
households to prepare for the cyclone (evacuation costs, protecting livestock and homes etc.), buy essential
needs (food, medicines etc.) and mitigate the impact of the cyclones on household food and nutrition security
and general wellbeing of their families. WFP will collaborate with government and UN agencies in
development of early warning messages under the leadership of NDMO and support the Department of Social
Protection (DSP) to disseminate early earning messages including cash assistance messages to the final list
9

For a detailed description of UN activities see the relevant CERF projects at https://cerf.un.org/. There is also a summary table in the
annex.

7

of targeted households. The DSP will engage field-based staff to support community sensitization about the
tropical cyclones and potential for assistance before impact. Messages about assistance will be designed and
delivered in such a way they do not raise expectations for cash transfers in areas not affected by the tropical
cyclone.
Partners: Ministry of Women, Children and Social Protection and Ministry of Finance
Challenges and potential improvements in the future:
Sudden onset disasters, such as tropical cyclones, affect everyone in their path, whereas the use of a social
registry for targeting restricts anticipatory support, such as multipurpose cash, to households in the social
protection beneficiary registry. In addition, while the use of the national social protection beneficiary registry
contributes to the strategic objective of strengthening government systems, there is limited oversight over
inclusion and exclusion errors when a disaster occurs. As a mitigating measure, regular deduplication,
graduation, and retargeting to include households below the poverty line can increase the likelihood that the
most vulnerable individuals will be included on the beneficiary list. While the above is a medium to long-term
solution, there is a clear need for early action plans, particularly when using the government beneficiary
registry. The early actions can be activated promptly after the disaster has passed to support and prioritize
those who were affected but not targeted through government beneficiary registry (horizontal expansion). The
AA pilot is an opportunity to showcase how existing government policies and legislative frameworks for
financing disaster risk management, social protection, and climate change adaptation can reduce impact of
climate disaster through anticipatory actions. This strategy ensures that AA interventions are localized, owned
by the government and hence sustainable and cost-effective.

Activity 2. Fishing-boat strengthening kits and water-tight drums co-lead by Ministry of Agriculture
and FAO/Fijian Red Cross
Objective: Reducing the loss of livelihoods by securing boats, tools, and cash crops.
Description: To mitigate the potential impacts on the agriculture sector, FAO and the Fiji Red Cross, in
agreement with the Ministry of Agriculture, will distribute fishing-boat strengthening kits to at-risk fisherfolk and
water-tight drums to farmers. The fishing-boat strengthening kits will enable fisherfolk to pull their boats
ashore and store them in secure areas such as mangroves or along sandbars, where they can be tightly
secured. Fisherfolk will also be presented with the opportunity to store their gear in the water-tight drums.
Water-tight drums present a viable solution for farmers to securely store their cash crops, providing a dry
sanctuary that mitigates the risk of damage. It has dual purpose: firstly, to facilitate the preservation of crops,
and secondly, to provide a repository for clippings. By pre-emptively stockpiling crops prior to the cyclone's
arrival, the potential for crop damage and loss can be mitigated. The decision to use the drum for either
crops/fishing gear, or both, will be at the discretion of the household. This will be complemented by early
warning messages delivered to high-risk households in accordance with the established communication
protocols outlined by NDMO and other UN agencies.
Partners: Ministry of Agriculture, Fiji Red Cross and IFRC
Challenges and potential improvements in the future: One of the primary obstacles is related to logistics.
It will be crucial to preposition and store items in advance of the season to maximize their impact. While the
necessary items can be sourced locally, they are predominantly found in Suva or Nadi. Ensuring their
accessibility from various locations across the country and maintaining their safety in readily accessible
warehouses will be of utmost importance. Simulating and practicing the delivery arm of these actions will be
critical in the ‘off season’ to address any unforeseen challenges with getting the goods from the warehouses
to at-risk families. As we progress, we'll need to refine and scale up this process, envisioning what the
expansion might entail. This will require collaboration with the Ministry of Agriculture, building on the lessons
learned during this initial pilot stage.

8

Activity 3. Maternal and reproductive health supplies and GBV protection co-lead by Ministry of
Health and Medical Services (MHMD), MWCSP and UNFPA
Objective: Safeguard the health and well-being of women and girls to be affected by impending cyclones
Description: Partnering closely with the Ministry of Health and Medical Services (MHMS) and MWCSP, as
well as local NGOs and associations, UNFPA will provide essential maternal and reproductive health supplies,
alongside targeted GBV protections, to women and girls in forecasted cyclone impact areas. UNFPA's
intervention has a strategic emphasis on minimizing life-threatening risks associated with Sexual and
Reproductive Health (SRH) and Gender-Based Violence (GBV). These efforts encompass the distribution of
Pacific-customized kits, complemented by informational messages stressing the importance of seeking timely
support and care from trained healthcare professionals and other service providers. These kits comprise the
following: clean delivery kits for pregnant women in the community, dignity kits for women aged 15-49,
including those with disabilities, and menstrual hygiene kits for girls aged 10 and above. This comprehensive
strategy aims to safeguard the health and well-being of women and girls in the face of impending cyclones,
addressing their unique needs and vulnerabilities.
Partners: Ministry of Health and Medical Services, Ministry of Women, Children, and Social Protection,
Medical Services Pacific, Fiji Disabled People’s Federation, and Reproductive and Family Health Association
of Fiji.
Challenges and potential improvements in the future:
Data Accuracy - Accurate and timely data is essential for successful anticipatory action, especially for
vulnerable populations in crisis situations. Inaccurate data can lead to the misallocation of resources. UNFPA
will potentially try to address this challenge by:
•
•

Utilizing data analytics and modelling techniques such as the MISP calculator to predict the needs of
vulnerable populations based on historical data and trends.
Engaging with local communities to establish nature-based monitoring mechanisms that provide realtime data on emerging risks.

Logistical Constraints - Delivering supplies and implementing anticipatory measures in remote and at-risk
areas can be challenging, especially when time is of the essence. To overcome logistical constraints, UNFPA
will consider:
•
•

Identifying strategic locations to pre-position essential supplies, ready for rapid deployment when an
emergency is anticipated.
Building partnerships with local organizations, providing them with the resources and training
necessary to assist in anticipatory actions.

Coordination and Collaboration - Coordinating anticipatory action efforts with various stakeholders, including
government agencies, UN agencies, and community leaders, is vital for a successful response but can also
be complex and challenging. UNFPA will work towards enhancing coordination by:
•
•
•

Advocating for collaboration on emergency preparedness activities and information sharing on
challenges and good practices in the health cluster and protection cluster.
Conducting joint planning and simulation exercises with relevant partners to improve coordination for
AA activities.
Engaging with local communities to build their capacity in disaster preparedness and response,
fostering a sense of ownership and participation.

Activity 4. Distribution of WASH kits co-lead by the Ministry of Health and Medical Services (MHMS)
with UNICEF
Objective: Mitigate the impact of the cyclones on access to water and sanitation services and ensuring
effective hygiene practices.

9

Description: UNICEF will work with the MHMS to improve and maintain access to Water, Sanitation, and
Hygiene (WASH), through the following activities:
•
•
•
•
•

Coordinate the WASH cluster response with technical advice, such as assessments, (inter-)cluster
coordination, information management (4Ws) and reporting.
Prepositioning of WASH related non-food items at likely impacted evacuation centres and key public
infrastructures (hygiene kits, water containers, menstrual hygiene management materials).
Support coordination and innovation management across government led WASH, cluster.
Targeted support at evacuation centres to ensure WASH response is gender and disability sensitive.
UNICEF will monitor and evaluate the implementation of the project to measure the impact of
anticipatory action in cooperation with the Government counterparts.

Partners: Ministry of Health & Medical Services, Ministry of Education and Human Resource Development,
WASH Cluster CSO partners (Contingency partnerships in progress).
Challenges and potential improvements in the future:
Much work needs to be done to improve preparedness in Fiji including: training for cluster coordinators and
information managers, onboarding of contingency partnerships for rapid response, increasing number of longterm agreements with contractors to deliver local supplies, review and strengthen local long-term agreements
with NFI suppliers. These are all ongoing actions but as cyclone season arrives are still in progress to develop
and may not fully be in place if there is an early activation.

Activity 5. Learning materials co-lead by the Ministry of Education and UNICEF
Objective: Ensure that children return to safe learning environments and are provided with relevant learning
resources to continue their education.
Description: To provide vulnerable children access to a secure learning environment, UNICEF will distribute
school-in-a box kit to targeted schools. UNICEF and the Ministry of Education (MoE) will also provide
vulnerable children and their care in with access to PFA (Psychosocial First Aid).
•
•
•
•

Coordinate the Education cluster response with technical advice, such as assessments, (inter-)cluster
coordination, information management (4Ws) and reporting.
Prepositioning of Education related non-food items at schools (tents, school kits).
Support coordination and innovation management across government led Education cluster.
UNICEF will monitor and evaluate the implementation of the project to measure the impact of
anticipatory action in cooperation with the Government counterparts.

Partners: Ministry of Education and Human Resource Development (MEHRD), Education Cluster CSO
partners.
Challenges and potential improvements in the future:
• Detailed data on school populations and vulnerability not available. Better data in the future can lead
to better targeting of supplies and improved prepositioning.
• Tents need to be sourced internationally and lead times for replacement can be slow.
• Local expertise and capacity to erect tents without training is limited. Further training will be needed in
the future to support first responders.

Activity 6. Shelter strengthening kits co-lead by Ministry of Rural & Maritime Development and
Disaster Management and IOM with technical support from IFRC
Objective: To minimize the damage caused by cyclones on weak shelters belonging to vulnerable
community members.
Description: IOM, with technical and coordination support through Fiji’s Shelter cluster and IFRC, will work
with active Shelter Cluster members, agencies, offices, and organizations to provide the following:

10

•
•
•

IEC materials on shelter reinforcement and the basics of tying down a shelter, as well as on safe
evacuation and local service providers in the event of an emergency.
Ropes, fasteners, screws, tarpaulins, and other shelter materials to support the strengthening of
shelters ahead of the landfall of a cyclone.
Construction Tools to support communities in the shelter strengthening process.

Partners: Ministry of Rural & Maritime Development and Disaster Management, IOM, IFRC, Fiji Red Cross,
Habitat for Humanity
Challenges and potential improvements in the future:
There are several envisaged challenges to shelter interventions conducted within the AA Framework, the
majority of which revolve around the provision of support to the most vulnerable or in need communities.
Three core challenges have been discussed amongst the National Shelter Cluster members: 1) with shelter
materials often spiking in cost after a cyclone makes landfall, deploying prepositioned kits before landfall
leaves a risk of supporting households who may be less in need than others following landfall. With the spike
in price and less prepositioned kits, response efforts may be hampered. 2) The timeframe of the AA activities
leaves little room for capacity building, so interventions will need to largely rely on construction knowledge
already present in any given community. The need to manage expectations for what can be achieved in this
window, as well as focusing targeting on communities with experience in repairing/strengthening shelters, is a
challenge. 3) Reaching maritime islands will pose a significant challenge to the cluster as most warehouses
and stocks are in Viti Levu and Vanua Levu, with the greatest concentration in Suva and Nadi. Movement to
maritime islands right before a cyclone may be too high of a risk.

Activity 7. Safety and Protection horizontal support co-lead by the Ministry of Women, Children and
Social Protection (MWCSP) and UN Women
Objective: To ensure safety and protection concerns are assessed and appropriately factored into post needs
assessments and responses of the different key sectors.
Description: From the alert or trigger phase, social welfare officers and women’s interest officers in the rural
and maritime areas, as part of their preparedness activities to respond, are usually already moving through
location where their services are based to check on the facilities, the services it’s meant to provide in safety
and protection. During the past year, the cluster had also revised their rapid assessment form to be deployed
on Kobo. A series of workshops has been held in the various divisions over the past year to finalize the form.
During the readiness phase, the officers will be refreshed on the use of the form on Kobo and how to collect
protection data. This will be facilitated online whilst in their various rural locations.
Partners: Department of Women & Department of Child services and Social Protection and Fiji Safety and
Protection Cluster Members.
Challenges and potential improvements in the future:
• The designation of staff (usually public servants) that would support protection assessments will only
be determined at the time of the looming emergency. In future, the ministry, as part of their
preparedness could already obtain a list of individual staff that would be on call and able to deploy for
assessments as soon as restriction to movements has been lifted.
• Virtual training will only depend on the strength of the network in the divisions and the available
devices which assessors will use for accessing Kobo and collecting data. In future, a series of data
collection devices could be acquired and issued out on receipt of a warning (as an asset of the
organization) so that there won’t be any issues in accessing the kobo form. Data credit can also be
pushed out to the sim card on the devices to ensure connectivity during the refresher trainings.

Activity 8. Health and Nutrition Cluster Coordination co-lead by the Ministry of Health and WHO
Objective: To work in support of the Ministry of Health and other national authorities to improve the health
and nutrition outcomes of affected populations through timely, predictable, appropriate and effective
coordination of health and nutrition action in emergencies.
Description:

11

•
•
•

Support Fiji’s Health and Nutrition Cluster in coordinating national-level preparedness, emergency
response and recovery efforts, as requested/directed by MOH leadership.
Support Fiji’s Health and Nutrition Cluster with assessments, preparedness and service delivery in
emergencies through the provision of technical support, operational support (i.e. implementation), and
in-kind support, as requested/directed by MOH leadership.
Support Fiji’s Health and Nutrition Cluster to identify core advocacy concerns, including resource
requirements, and contribute key messages to advocacy outlets.

Partners: Fiji Ministry of Health and Medical Services, Fiji Health and Nutrition Cluster, Adventist
Development and Relief Agency (ADRA), Empower Pacific, International Federation of Red Cross (IFRC),
International Planned Parenthood Federation (IPPF), The Pacific Community (SPC), Save the Children,
United National Population Fund (UNFPA), United National Children’s Fund (UNICEF), World Health
Organization (WHO).
Challenges and potential improvements in the future: A resilient health system must include the ability to
both maintain the provision of basic health care and respond to health system shocks. A strong and equitable
health system is resilient in the face of potential threats, including but not limited to the climate crisis, public
health emergencies and disasters. The ongoing work of health and nutrition cluster partners to build a resilient
health system will support Fiji throughout the preparedness, anticipatory action, response and recovery
phases.

Activity 9. Common approach to Early Warning and Community Sensitization facilitated by UNICEF
and UNDRR
Objective: Protect and minimize the loss of lives and livelihoods by disseminating timely and actionable early
warning messages to communities via multiple channels.
Description: Building on the existing “Get Ready Disaster Happen” multi-media campaign, this activity will
support the development and dissemination of timely early warning messages to the public through radio,
television, social media and SMS platforms. The early warning messages are linked to the specific readiness
and activation triggers and provide sector specific messages, including WASH, Health, Nutrition and
Protection issues, Food Security, and education. These messages will be broadcasted in English, iTaukei and
Hindi languages. During the readiness trigger, the messages will constantly air on radio and television
platforms, through SMS blasts and social media. The frequency of these messages on all platforms will
increase once the Action Trigger is Activated. Additionally, through the partnerships with CSO partners,
volunteers will be mobilized into communities that would fall on the potential path of the disaster to assist in
cyclone preparations. Turaga ni Koros, village leaders and advisory counsellors who would be sensitized on
Anticipatory Action will be engaged through digital platforms and mobilized in their respective communities.
Partners: Ministry of Rural & Maritime Development and Disaster Management; National Disaster
Management Office (NDMO); Communication Cluster (CCE WG), United Nations Office for Disaster Risk
Reduction (UNDRR), and World Health Organization (WHO).
Challenges and potential improvements in the future: Potential Challenges and potential improvements in
the future are:
• Dissemination of messages through media and SMS platforms can be disrupted should the
telecommunications infrastructure be damaged by the disaster.
• Community mobilization can be hindered with restricted movements in communities.
• Need to revise and develop more messages with the input from each cluster/sector.

Logistics
Efficient operational logistics are paramount for the success of Anticipatory Action in Fiji. UN Agencies in Fiji
have access to the UNCT SharePoint, a central platform for operational collaboration and information
exchange. To streamline and improve operational logistics, each UN Agency's program and supply units have
access to the Long-Term Agreements (LTAs) Directory, which is available on the UNCT SharePoint. This
directory contains comprehensive information and instructions for effectively piggybacking existing LTAs,
thereby leveraging the global UN Mutual Recognition Agreement. It is noteworthy that all UN agencies
involved in the current proposal have endorsed a Mutual Recognition Statement. It's crucial to emphasize that

12

OMT Representatives and Operations Teams in all UN Agencies across the Pacific region are well-versed in
the operational procedures associated with this Mutual Recognition Agreement.
Access to LTA Directory: Within the UNCT SharePoint, all UN Agencies in Fiji can access the Long-Term
Agreements (LTA) Directory. This directory serves as a valuable resource, providing comprehensive
information and instructions on how to efficiently piggyback existing LTAs. The utilisation of this directory is
instrumental in capitalising on the global UN Mutual Recognition Agreement.
Mutual Recognition Statement: All UN agencies involved in the current proposal have signed a Mutual
Recognition Statement, emphasising the commitment to cooperation and harmonisation in operational
logistics. This shared agreement fosters a collaborative and unified approach among UN Agencies, ensuring
streamlined and efficient logistics processes.
Global LTA Requests: In addition to the UNCT SharePoint, UN Agencies in Fiji have the flexibility to request
copies of global LTAs listed on the United Nations Global Marketplace (UNGM) website. This option allows
each UN Agency to directly contact the respective UN Agency responsible for a particular LTA, ensuring
timely access to essential resources.
Piggybacking Process: The well-established piggybacking process is an efficient means of streamlining
operational procurement and logistics. This process extends to various types of LTAs, including those related
to transport, non-food items (NFIs), warehouse storage capacity, and more. UN Agencies in Fiji can leverage
this process to bolster their operational capabilities.
UN Agencies in Fiji, through their access to the UNCT SharePoint and commitment to the Mutual Recognition
Agreement, possess the necessary tools and cooperative spirit to optimize logistics and procurement and
distribution processes. Leveraging global LTAs from UNGM further enhances their operational capabilities.

Challenges and potential improvements in the future
•

•
•
•
•
•

•
•
•

Limited timeframe for preparatory work ahead of 2023 cyclone season and limited availability of
resources. This meant the pilot had to focus on a prioritized set of interventions which are feasible
and practical. This may also compromise the collection of baseline data. Limited time and
resources hinder comprehensive coverage of vulnerable populations. Furthermore, coordination
among government systems, UN Agencies and other partners may require additional efforts to
align strategies.
A common approach to targeting is being explored. Issues such as data sharing and limited time
are hindering its scope for the 2023 cyclone season.
Common logistics is being explored under the leadership of UNICEF and the national Logistics
cluster. Limited time for planning might not make it available for the 2023 cyclone season.
Remote areas such as the Eastern division are difficult and impossible to reach with assistance
on the first forecast. Geographic barriers may delay or impede supply distribution to remote areas.
TCs' unpredictable paths make targeting challenging, requiring a balance between certainty and
impact. Establishing effective vulnerability criteria is thus crucial.
Obtaining precise and current data on at risk populations, especially in crisis situations, presents
challenges. Inaccurate data can result in the misallocation of resources. For instance, whilst
WFP’s use of the national social protection beneficiary registry supports the strategic outcome of
strengthening government systems, there is limited control on the inclusion and exclusion errors
when the disaster strikes. An impact evaluation of the AA transfers can generate lessons for the
Department of Social Protection on how to improve beneficiary targeting when using government
systems by understanding impact of targeting from existing beneficiary registry on inclusion and
exclusion errors. This learning would lead to enhancement of beneficiary registry.
There are restrictions in accessing highly at-risk groups in peri-urban areas.
Involving local partners and engaging local communities in preparedness, targeting, and activities
is a challenge.
Better integration with preparedness efforts by development organizations is needed. This
includes potential involvement of regional organizations such as the South Pacific Community.

13

•
•

•
•

Exploring collaborations with the private sector through initiatives like the Fiji Disaster Business
Resilience Council and the OCHA and UNDP-led Connecting Business Initiative (CBi).
There is a clear need to have timely response plans along with anticipatory actions plans,
especially when using the government beneficiary registry. The timely response actions can be
activated immediately after the disaster has passed to support those that have been impacted but
were not supported by the AA pilot.
Additional resources would support capacity building. For instance, investing in capacity-building
initiatives for local healthcare providers, community leaders, and volunteers would enhance their
effectiveness in responding to SRH and GBV needs during emergencies.
The CERF-Anticipatory Action Framework will ensure that the human rights and protection needs
of specific groups of population that are often left behind -such as Persons with Disabilities
(PWDs), Persons with Albinism, women, children, elderly, and ethnic or other minorities are
equally protected by the CERF-Anticipatory Actions interventions in Fiji.10 In order to comply with
these objectives, OHCHR Pacific Regional Office has proposed to collaborate with the CERFAnticipatory Action in Fiji to provide technical cooperation and capacity building for the national
clusters and for the NDMO on the integration of the HRBA and SDGs in the context of emergency
responses to natural disasters.

10

Fiji ratified the nine United Nations (UN) core human rights treaties. Through the ratification of the international human rights treaties,
Fiji assumed international legal obligations to always respect, protect, and fulfill human rights, including during the state humanitarian
responses to natural disasters. Additionally, Fiji committed to work in line with the United Nations 2030 Agenda for sustainable
development and towards the achievement of the Sustainable Developments Goals (SDDGs). Taking into consideration both frameworks,
it becomes essential to integrate the Human Rights Based Approach (HRBA) values and the principle of “leaving no one behind” in the
humanitarian responses to natural disasters, including to respond to tropical cyclones.

14

4. The Money: Pre-arranged financing
Pre-arranged finance to fuel anticipatory action is critical, especially in sudden onset disasters, to enable
timely, effective anticipatory action. A key recommendation from the USG/ERC was to find co-financing for
coordinated anticipatory action in Fiji to ensure available funding is mutually reenforcing. Of course, partner
agencies invest considerable resources in building coordinated anticipatory action, but also for preparedness
already.
This framework for anticipatory action is not limited to CERF-funded activities. There are various other pooled
funds, bilateral donors and UN agencies’ internal reserve funds that can, within their own established criteria
and in complementarity, finance part of the collective approach when the need arises. Currently, WFP, FAO,
UNICEF, UNFPA and UNW have been able to secure additional funds.

Financing overview
Funding overview in US$ for coordinated framework
CERF
WFP
FAO
UNICEF
UNFPA
IOM
UNW

948,990
274,990
774,187
200,075
200,000

WHO
Others
Total

Additional agency
Total
financing
1,448,990
500,000
474,990
200,000
1,174,187
400,000
400,075
200,000
200,000
50,000
50,000
30,000
30,000

2,398,242

1,380,000

3,778,242

Central Emergency Response Fund (CERF)
The Emergency Relief Coordinator agreed to allocate up to $2.4 million from CERF to support anticipatory
action in Fiji. CERF will disburse funds to anticipatory action frameworks on a no-regrets basis once three
conditions are met:
•

•

•

Endorsement by the relevant Resident/Humanitarian Coordinator of the Anticipatory Action framework
(this document) and the CERF application package comprising an application chapeau, agency-specific
project proposals and agency-specific budgets (in annex);
Pre-approval by the Emergency Relief Coordinator of the Anticipatory Action framework (this document)
and the CERF application package comprising an application chapeau, agency-specific project proposals
and agency-specific budgets (in annex); and
Activation of either the readiness trigger or the action trigger within a maximum of two years from the
ERC’s pre-approval of the framework.

CERF disbursement is guaranteed once a trigger is reached. As the CERF funding will be activated and
distributed as automatically as possible immediately once the defined trigger(s) is/are reached. CERF will
disburse funds on a no-regrets basis. While a portion of the fund can be used immediately upon disbursement
for readiness activities, the remaining portion of the funding can only be used if and when an action trigger is
reached. The amount of funding for readiness vs action activities will be clearly defined in the pre-approved
project proposals and budget. The need to distinguish between these two cost categories in advance is
important given the different potential scenarios.
Pre-arrangement and/or receipt of CERF funding for anticipatory action does not preclude or guarantee
additional CERF funding for a complementary rapid response to save lives resulting from the same or other

15

shocks. This means that the pre-arranged funding by CERF for anticipatory action is for the hazards and
triggers outlined in this framework. Should there be additional needs or other disasters, CERF’s other funding
modalities can be requested.
Exact details on financing per agency can be found in the CERF application documents annexed.

Co-Financing
With support from the German Federal Foreign Office, a sum of USD500,000 has been allocated by WFP to
be disbursed upon confirmation of activation triggers to co-finance the CERF allocation intended to reach
10,000 households with multipurpose cash assistance, as well as other readiness and activation costs. Five
thousand (5000) additional households will benefit from WFP’s co-financing. In total 15,000 households are
planned to receive multipurpose financial assistance through the Anticipatory Action pilot project
Under FAO's Anticipatory Action Window, with generous support from the German Federal Foreign Office, a
sum of USD 200,000 has been strategically allocated to Fiji. This allocation is in reaction to the elevated
probability of an above-average cyclone season in the region. The funds will be directed towards facilitating
anticipatory action activities by prepositioning and distributing watertight drums and reinforcing fishing boats.
Furthermore, this financial support plays a pivotal role in fostering collaboration with the Fiji Red Cross,
thereby streamlining the logistical and operational procedures to expedite action in light of the trigger.
UNICEF is strategically poised to proactively address humanitarian needs in target communities, with a
dedicated allocation of USD 400,000 from the Global Humanitarian Thematic Funds. This funding enables
UNICEF, both independently and in collaboration with its trusted partners on the ground, to swiftly provide
vital assistance to those most vulnerable in the face of impending crises. Furthermore, UNICEF's ongoing
two-year work plan in cooperation with the Government of Fiji demonstrates the organization's commitment to
preparedness and anticipatory action. Within this comprehensive plan, there exists a flexibility that allows for
the seamless transition of existing activities into anticipatory actions when required. This proactive approach
underscores UNICEF's dedication to ensuring the well-being and safety of communities at risk, reinforcing its
role as a steadfast humanitarian leader.
The proposed AA funding of 212,413 USD will complement UNFPA’s ongoing disaster preparedness and
response activities (200,000 USD) in Fiji supported by donors such as USAID-BHA and DFAT. Both UNFPA
core resources and donor resources will be used to reach additional beneficiaries of the AA pilot initiative.
WHO’s co-financing supports work in Anticipatory Action on cross-cutting issues including contracting a
company to test early warning messages and technical support to Fiji’s Health and Nutrition Cluster
UNW’s co-financing is an extension of the work under Information Management that is already supporting the
MWCSP on. These funds are from the Core Humanitarian Funds of the organization.

Challenges and potential improvements in the future
•

•

•

While financing is increasingly available to carry out anticipatory actions, collective anticipatory action
requires an investment in building the framework. These “start-up costs” (or “build costs” as part of a
“build – fuel – evaluate” cycle of frameworks) are incurred by participating agencies prior to the activation
of a framework set up effective anticipatory actions. These costs may also include projects which enable a
collective approach (e.g. common targeting approaches) and other costs that pooled funds, including the
CERF, traditionally do not fund.
To enable a timely response within a short window of opportunity in a geographically very diverse country
such as Fiji, anticipatory action at scale requires commensurate disaster risk preparedness, including the
prepositioning of goods. There is limited funding available for such emergency response preparedness,
thus limiting the scope of this anticipatory action framework.
It must be understood that anticipatory action may support some of the most vulnerable communities
facing the impact of a tropical cyclone. Yet, the storms are still likely to cause damage beyond the
maximum number of people targeted, beyond the geographic reach or the scope of sectors covered by
this anticipatory action framework. More thought needs to be invested in ensuring linkages between

16

emergency response preparedness, anticipatory action, rapid response and early recovery, including
around community engagement, activities and financing.

17

5. The Learning
Any activation of this framework will offer enhanced learning opportunities on implementing anticipatory action
and further provide evidence to support scale-up of the approach in the future. Evidence generation and
learning are a critical key to adjustment and scale up of the approach with government and non-government
stakeholders. To support this process, and project learning, monitoring and evaluation committee has been
convened by OCHA with partners to this framework to coordinate learning and evidence gathering on
anticipatory action. One key aspect of learning will be to assess the impact of the framework against the
premise of where possible, anticipatory actions may lead to a faster, more efficient, and more dignified
approach which also may protect development gains. Another key learning will be process learning through
joint efforts with governments and partners in anticipatory action programming.

Such learning will be divided into two streams:
1. Independent agency M&E which is natural part of any programme and;
2. A multi-stakeholder and multi-disciplinary impact assessment of the CERF pilot to develop a cohesive
narrative on the impact of this intervention across the different UN agencies, contributing disciplines
and implementing partners.
Learning from this framework should be achieved with the highest possible standards and rigor.
While the project committee will discuss the key learning questions in more detail, the following areas of
learning have been pre-identified as possible starting points designing M&E as well as an independent
evaluation protocol:
• Timing: Was the timing of the intervention in relation to peak cyclone season appropriate?
• Impact: Did anticipatory actions reduce the impacts of tropical cyclones on beneficiaries? Did
they result in improved outcomes?
• Joint targeting: Did the common beneficiary database and joint targeting lead to improved
efficiencies and more effective assistance provided to beneficiaries by agencies who used this
modality?
• Social inclusion: Did the most at-risk populations receive timely assistance? Did the most at risk
receive the most appropriate assistance to address their needs?
• Early warning: How effective is the joint approach and protocol to early warning? Did the content
of the early warning messages matter?
• Localization: How did the anticipatory action approach engage with the localization agenda?
What can be improved?
• Partnership: What elements can be learned from the partnership with the Fijian government?
How can the current experience and learning support an institutionalization of anticipatory
approaches?
• Actions: How can the anticipatory action by each agency be further improved?
• Impact: What are the socio-economic impacts (including food security, livelihoods, health and
protection) to beneficiary populations from the different AA interventions that can be documented?
What is the return of investment for the different AA interventions?

Monitoring & Evaluation
Each agency will use its existing monitoring & evaluation systems to collect and track data on implementation
progress and outputs achieved. This can be financed through the CERF funds. All findings will be shared with
OCHA. M&E questionnaires should be coordinated among agencies to allow for maximum learning, each to
evaluate and report on a set of common questions and indicators across all interventions. This may also
enable a reduction in the number of interviews required by beneficiaries. Partners can bring in MEAL experts
from their respective global and regional level and can draw on recently published guidance to evaluate
anticipatory action.10 Further common questions can be discussed and agreed through the project committee.

Independent Evaluation
Agencies in the framework also agree to participate in an independent evaluation that will aim to build a
cohesive narrative on the impact of this CERF pilot. Such support for the evaluation from the agencies may
include, but not be limited to:
• Provide feedback and support to develop an evaluation methodology and protocol;

18

•
•
•
•
•

Collect pre and post disaster data;
Share beneficiary data (share information on household characteristics without identifiers) or agree on
a third party to collect data;
Support the roll-out of a common surveys;
Participate in evidence and learning processes;
Review and provide timely feedback on the analysis and evaluation report.

The project committee will oversee this evaluation and define the scope of the exercise. The evaluation will
review the effectiveness of all AA interventions, from the more hardware-focused approaches (distribution of
cash, dignity kits, watertight drums), to software-focused approaches (technical assistance and advisory) and
process-focused support (early warning systems and communication).
At present the methodology is suggesting three scenarios (due to the late finalization of the Framework ahead
of the cyclone season):
• Scenario A: AA is triggered after January 2024 as according to El Nino cyclone season forecast and
there is time for a comprehensive baseline data collection;
• Scenario B: AA is triggered before January 2024, with no time for a comprehensive baseline data
collection;
• Scenario C: No AA is triggered during the 2023/24 cyclone season until end April 2024.

The overall evaluation will need to be designed to cover three components:
1. Process learning across partners and joint efforts with the Fijian Government;
2. Socio-Economic household impacts (including food security, livelihoods, health and protection);
3. Return for Investment calculations and considerations based on the various AA intervention streams.
The proposed methodology should include quantitative and qualitative data approaches, and possibly use a
quasi-experimental difference-in-difference evaluation design. The evaluation protocol will include tools for
data collection, schedule and protocol for data collection, sampling frame for data collection, identification of
contributing stakeholders, etc.
In the case of Scenario A, a stronger quantitative household data component is expected, given the available
time for the process of baseline data collection. However, for Scenario B, a more qualitative process of posttrigger data collection might be needed to accommodate the lack of a strong baseline before the AA was
triggered. And for Scenario C, a stronger qualitative process learning focused evaluation might be
appropriate.
FAO is providing technical support for this area in connection with the Asia Pacific Technical Working Group
on Anticipatory Action, which is co-led with IFRC.

19

6. Final provisions
Advocacy and public communication
Agencies agree to coordinate, under the leadership of the NDMO and the Resident Coordinator, key
messages around the framework, including during the development, activation and learning phase.
In case of an activation of the framework, close coordination facilitated by OCHA will facilitate as a minimum:
a joint press release (Annex 11) and mutual amplification of social media stories.
To enhance common messaging and advocacy for anticipatory action, agencies agree to share any visuals
(photos, videos) and impact stories with the ad hoc committee as these become available.

20

Annex 1 – Trigger Evaluation Specification
The Category of the tropical cyclone is included in the forecast from RSMC Nadi, which uses the Australian tropical
cyclone intensity scale.
The official forecast published by RSMC Nadi has a maximum lead time of 72 hours. This corresponds to the portion of
the overall 120-hour forecast that is used to evaluate the activation trigger. The portion of the forecast with lead times
from 72 to 120 hours is not part of the official RSMC forecast and is only being used to evaluate readiness trigger. The full
120-hour forecast is not publicly available, but the truncated 72-hour forecast (i.e., the official forecast) is published11 by
RSMC Nadi.
The distance of a cyclone forecast from Fiji is calculated from the “best track” forecast, which indicates the position of the
centre of the eye of the storm. A cyclone is deemed to “make landfall” if its track, interpolated linearly between each
forecasted point, passes over any point in land in Fiji. It is deemed to pass within 250 km of Fiji if its interpolated track
passes over the shape defined as a 250 km buffer around Fiji, calculated using the EPSG:3832 projection. The land in Fiji
is defined by the shapefile for Fiji on the Humanitarian Data Exchange 12, which excludes the uninhabited island of Ceva-IRa.

Annex 2 – Historical Analysis
Historical Actual Tracks
Based on the historical official best tracks of tropical cyclones since the 1969/70 season, the trigger conditions would
have been met by 20 tropical cyclones in the past, corresponding to a return period of 2.7 years. Of these 20 cyclones,
15 would have met the “Category 4 or 5 while within 250 km” criterion, 9 would have met the “Category 3, 4 or 5 while
making landfall” criterion, and 4 would have met both criteria.
In the past ten seasons (i.e., back to and including the 2013/14 season), the trigger would have been met by the following
cyclones:
•

•
•
•
•

Winston 2015/16
Gita 2017/18
Pola 2018/19
Harold 2019/20
Yasa 2020/21

Note that the above return period analysis is based on the actual tracks of the cyclones, not the historical forecasted
tracks, thus is only an approximation of the historical return period of cyclones that would have triggered this framework.
Historical RSMC Nadi Official Forecasts
Based on the historical official 72-hour RSMC Nadi forecasts for Evan 2012/13, Harold 2019/20, and Yasa 2020/21, the
action trigger would have been activated on average 70 hours before the cyclone either first made landfall or passed
closest to Fiji.
Historical ECMWF Forecasts
ECMWF hindcasts (available13 since the 2006/07 season) were also used to estimate the trigger’s historical performance.
Based on these hindcasts, the readiness trigger would have been activated on average 87 hours before the cyclone
either first made landfall or passed closest to Fiji.
Of the 8 cyclones in the dataset who would have triggered the action trigger, the readiness trigger gave advance warning
for 7 of them. For the remaining cyclone (Daman 2007/08), the readiness trigger would have gone off at the same time as
the action trigger.
The readiness trigger would have given a false alarm (i.e., triggering, but the actual path did not end up meeting the
trigger conditions) for one storm (Keni 2017/18).
For the remaining 82 storms in the dataset, the readiness trigger was correctly not activated.

11

Recent official forecast tracks available here: https://www.met.gov.fj/index.php?page=trackmap
https://data.humdata.org/dataset/cod-ab-fji
13
https://rda.ucar.edu/datasets/ds330.3/
12

21

Annex 3 – Distribution list
Distribution list A
To
Resident Coordinator

Dirk Wagener dirk.wagener@un.org; Jan Nemecek jan.nemecek@un.org; Alumita Masitabua
alumita.masitabua@un.org; RCO Fiji rco.fiji@un.org

Cc
OCHA

NDMO
UNFPA
IOM
UNICEF
WHO

WFP

UNWOMEN

FAO
UNDRR
OHCHR

Tareq Talahma talahma@un.org; Peter Krakolinig krakolinig@un.org; Sara Manni sara.manni@un.org;
Valerie Broudic valerie.broudic@un.org; Tristan Downing tristan.downing@un.org; Daniel Pfister
pfisterd@un.org; Yakubu Alhassan yakubu.alhassan@un.org; Daniel Gilman gilmand@un.org; Julia Wittig
wittigj@un.org; OCHA-cerf cerf@un.org
Vasiti Soko vasiti.soko@gmail.com; Litiana Bainimarama lbainimarama@govnet.gov.fj or
lnaidoleca@gmail.com; Napolioni Boseiwaqa napsboseiwaqa@gmail.com; Prishika Nadan
prishinadan@gmail.com ; National Emergency Operations Centre neocfiji@gmail.com
Iori Kato kato@unfpa.org Mateen Shaheen shaheen@unfpa.org; Ana Maria Leal leal@unfpa.org; Abdul
Hussain abdhussain@unfpa.org; Simon Narayan snarayan@unfpa.org
BIDDER Matthew Aaron Mark mbidder@iom.int; KANTHA Solomon skantha@iom.int; DEVI Karishma
kdevi@iom.int; RO Bangkok - Emergency and Post-Crisis Team ROBangkokEPC@iom.int
Jonathan Veitch jveitch@unicef.org; Roshni Basu rbasu@unicef.org; Diego Fernando Lopez
dflopez@unicef.org; Ali Safarnejad asafarnejad@unicef.org; Halitesh Datt hdatt@unicef.org; Semiti Temo
stemo@unicef.org; Ronesh Prasad roprasad@unicef.org; James Robertson jrobertson@unicef.org
JACOBS, Mark Andrew jacobsma@who.int; MAHMOUD, Nuha hamidn@who.int; GILMORE, Chandra
gilmorec@who.int; CASEY, Sean scasey@who.int ; DE SOUZA, Jeff Brian Delali deje@who.int
Alpha Bah alpha.bah@wfp.org; Emma Conlan emma.conlan@wfp.org; Philippe Brewster
philippe.brewster@wfp.org; Rika Mitsuhashi rika.mitsuhashi@wfp.org; Rukiye Uysal
rukiye.uysal@wfp.org; Jorge Diaz jorge.diaz@wfp.org; Pritesh Nand pritesh.nand@wfp.org; Sumaiya
Kabir sumaiya.kabir@wfp.org; Saidamon Bodamaev saidamon.bodamaev@wfp.org; Adam Mcvie
adam.mcvie@wfp.org; Osborne Sibande osborne.sibande@wfp.org; Urbe Secades
urbe.secades@wfp.org; Bronwyn Healy-Aarons bronwyn.healy-aarons@wfp.org; Diego Flores
diego.flores@wfp.org; Min Sun mi.sun@wfp.org
Naheed Ahmed Naheed.ahmed@unwomen.org; Katalaine Duaibe katalaine.duaibe@unwomen.org;
Lanieta Tokalauvere lanieta.tokalauvere@unwomen.org
Yao, Xiangjun (FAOSAP) Xiangjun.Yao@fao.org; Talakai, Malia (FAOSAP) Malia.Talakai@fao.org;
Young, Joann (FAOFJ) Joann.Young@fao.org; Vukialau, Mere (FAOFJ) Mere.Vukialau@fao.org; Kinch,
JeffreyPaul (FAOSAP) Jeffrey.Kinch@fao.org; Jones, Catherine (FAORAP) Catherine.Jones@fao.org;
Jang, Inyoung (FAORAP) Inyoung.Jang@fao.org; Riquet, Damien (FAORAP) Damien.Riquet@fao.org
Gabrielle EMERY gabrielle.emery@un.org; Nazgul Borkosheva nazgul.borkosheva@un.org
Heike ALEFSEN heike.alefsen@un.org; Thomas HUNECKE thomas.hunecke@un.org; Francisco Javier
SANJUAN sanjuan@un.org

Distribution list B
to
Ministry of Health &
Medical Services
Ministry of Women,
Children and Social
Protection
Ministry of
Agriculture
Ministry of Education
Ministry of Rural &
Maritime
Development &
Disaster
Management
cc
NDMO

Anaseini Maisema abmaisema@gmail.com ; Anaseini B. Maisema anaseini.maisema@health.gov.fj ;
lvatuvoka@gmail.com; lvatuvoka@yahoo.com; Jese Vatukela jese.vatukela@health.gov.fj
Vimal Deo vimal24deo@yahoo.com or vimal.deo@health.gov.fj; Fiji WASH Cluster
fijiwashcluster@gmail.com; Toga Vosataki togavosataki@yahoo.com
Selai Korovusere SelaiK@mwcpa.gov.fj; Salote Biukoto salote.biukoto@mwcpa.gov.fj; Rozia Bi
rbi@mwcsp.gov.fj; Laisani Petersen laisani.petersen@unwomen.org
Titilia Wati titiliadavetanivalu3@gmail.com
Semisi Siga semisi.siga01@govnet.gov.fj; Koroiwaqa koroiwaqa1989@gmail.com

Arieta Dimuri ddsmrmd@gmail.com; Kasalia Kororua kasakororua@gmail.com; Keith Hornby
keithhornby@gmail.com;

Vasiti Soko vasiti.soko@gmail.com; Litiana Bainimarama lbainimarama@govnet.gov.fj or
lnaidoleca@gmail.com; Napolioni Boseiwaqa napsboseiwaqa@gmail.com; Prishika Nadan
prishinadan@gmail.com ; National Emergency Operations Centre neocfiji@gmail.com

22

Annex 4 – DRAFT trigger messages
From: data.science@humdata.org
To: distribution list (see annex)
SUBJECT: Anticipatory action Fiji – Readiness trigger reached
[readiness trigger]
This is an automated message.
Dear Resident Coordinator, dear colleagues,
The readiness trigger of the coordinated anticipatory action pilot for tropical cyclones in Fiji has been reached in line with
the 120-hour forecast shared by the Fiji Meteorological Service, operators of Regional Specialized Meteorological Centre
(RSMC) Nadi.
Readiness activities in line with the framework document [link] should now commence. CERF funding to UN agencies is
being released. OCHA may convene a meeting of the participating partners.
Best wishes and good luck,
OCHA Center for Humanitarian Data
----[action trigger]
SUBJECT: Anticipatory Action Fiji – Action trigger reached
This is an automated message.
Dear Resident Coordinator, dear colleagues,
The action trigger of the coordinated anticipatory action pilot for tropical cyclones in Fiji has been reached in line with the
72-hour official forecast shared by the Fiji Meteorological Service, operators of Regional Specialized Meteorological
Centre (RSMC) Nadi.
All activities in line with the framework document [link] should now commence. OCHA may convene a meeting of the
participating partners.
Best wishes and good luck,
OCHA Center for Humanitarian Data
PS: Please remember that the impact of this pilot will be evaluated and we encourage all partners to document decisions
and lessons learned as best as possible during this activation. Finally, please also ensure any visuals, stories, social
media is shared with the group.

23

Annex 5 – Draft Complementary cyclone-path information messages
Below is a sample complementary cyclone forecast information message. The forecast in this sample was fabricated
purely for the sample and is not valid.

24

25

Annex 6 – Overview of Activities
Outcome

Intervention

The most
vulnerable
households are
able to meet
their essential
needs

Multi-purpose
cash

Ensure
emergency
water,
sanitation and
hygiene
supplies to
tropical
cyclone
affected
populations

Non-food
items (WASH)

Lead
Agency

Government
Counterparts

Proposed Activities

Targeted
People

WFP

Ministry of Women,
Children and Social
Protection; Ministry of
Finance

•

MPC distribution through DSW

75,000
People

•

Distribution of emergency WASH kits
and tarpaulins

•

Distribution of MHM pads

•

Distribution and installation of
temporary learning centres

•

Distribution and sensitisation of
emergency learning materials

•

Mass Media messages distribution

•

SMS Blasts

•

Women with Disability Dignity Kits –
Prepositioned supplies with DPO, to
be distributed as preparedness as
soon as disaster path is defined

•

Distribution of clean delivery kit to
visibly pregnant women in the
community through community
health workers to ensure safe
delivery in case they not able to
reach health facilities or Health
facilities and supplies are destroyed.

Ministry of Health and
Medical Services

Ensure that
children return
to safe learning
environments
and are
provided with
relevant
learning
resources to
continue their
education.

Non-food
items
(Education)

Ministry of Education

The affected
community has
access to
critical
information

Services
(Community
engagement)

NDMO/ Ministry of
Communication

Women and
Girls, women
with disabilities
have access to
essential
hygiene items

Non-food
items
(protection)

Ministry of Women,
Children &
Poverty Alleviation

UNICEF

Pregnant
women have
access to clean
delivery kits
through health
facilities

Non-food
items (Health)

Dignity Kit for
women &
Menstrual
hygiene kits for
Young Girls

Non-food
items
(protection)

Decreased
damage and
loss to crops,
tools and
fishing gears of

Non-food
items

UNFPA

Ministry of Health &
Medical Services

•

Distribution of Dignity kits usually
intended for one per household for
women aged (15-49) and menstrual
hygiene kits one per young girl aged
(10-14)

•

Distribution of watertight drums

Ministry of Women,
Children &
Poverty Alleviation

FAO

Ministry of Agriculture
and Waterways

26

20,000
People

2,350
People

2,400
People

farmers and
fisherfolk
Decreased
damage and
loss to boats of
fisherfolk

Non-food
items

Ministry of Agriculture
and Waterways

Farmers and
fisherfolk are
informed that
can take locally
led actions

Services
(Early warning
messages)

NDMO/ Ministry of
Communication/
Ministry of Agriculture
and Waterways

Non-food
items

Ministry of Rural &
Maritime
Development and
Disaster
Management

Decreased
damage and
loss to
shelters

IOM/IFRC
Evacuation
centres
management is
boosted

Cluster
coordination

Services
(Evacuation
centre
coordination)

Ministry of Rural &
Maritime
Development and
Disaster
Management

Services
(Gender and
Protection)

UN
Women

Ministry of Women,
Children and Social
Protection

Services
(Health)

WHO

Ministry of Health and
Medical Services

27

•

Distribution of Small boat
strengthening kits

•

EWM on potential locally led
actions

•

Distribution of tie-down kits and
tarpaulins, including basic tools and
materials for minor works
2,760
People

•

Coordination, monitoring and support
to Evacuation Centre management
in support of NDMO

•

Gender and protection support and
analysis

•

Deployment of DSW’s Community
Services Teams

•

Cross-cutting support to the health
cluster

Annex 7 - CERF Chapeau and project proposals (see cerf.un.org)

28

Annex 8 – Draft Joint Press Release RC-NDMO
GOVERNMENT AND HUMANITARIAN COMMUNITY IN FIJI LAUNCH ANTICIPATORY ACTION
FOR TROPICAL CYCLONE [TC name] - AFFECTED COMMUNITIES TO PREVENT
HUMANITARIAN SUFFERING
Suva, [date]

The Government of Fiji and the United Nations activated the Anticipatory Action Framework in Fiji to
prevent and mitigate the immediate impact of the forecasted [TC name]. The humanitarian
community in Fiji has acted on meteorological forecast data to pre-emptively mitigate and respond to
the worst likely impacts on TC-affected communities.
To this end, the Central Emergency Response Fund (CERF) disbursed $x.x million (xxx FJD) to
support the anticipatory actions. With these funds, the United Nations, its national partners and the
Fiji government, will support some of the most vulnerable and at-risk communities through
humanitarian interventions that will help mitigate the impact of the [TC name].
"The humanitarian system must be as anticipatory as possible, and only as reactive as necessary. AA
project aims to complement existing mechanisms rather than undermining community resilience and
this should really form the basis of our deliverables" said the Permanent Secretary for Rural and
Maritime Development and Disaster Management, Mr. Isoa Talemaibua. According to the Resident
Coordinator in Fiji, Mr. Dirk Wagener, “Anticipatory action in the Pacific, especially in Fiji, is not merely
a response to crises but a proactive investment in resilience and sustainability. By acting with
foresight, we can shape a future where vulnerability gives way to preparedness, and communities
thrive amidst challenges.”
Recipients of these funds enable UN agencies, through collaboration with Fiji national clusters, led by
Government Ministries, to communicate early warning messages, distribute multi-purpose cash
assistance and comprehensive relief packages (non-food items, such as: clean delivery kits, drums,
xxx).
In addition, essential items, such as hygiene, dignity and health kits are distributed to facilitate access
to critical health and protection services, xxx clarify activities. Recognizing the specific impacts of
disasters on women and marginalized groups, the allocation seeks to address a broad range of their
needs across all phases of the response.
The anticipatory allocation from the CERF in Fiji is the latest example of anticipatory humanitarian
action for sudden-onset disasters. Developments in data and predictive analytics make it increasingly
possible to anticipate when a disaster is about to strike and take necessary action in advance. This
approach offers a potentially more dignified, swifter, and (cost-)effective way to respond to the
humanitarian needs of people caught in the global climate crisis.

ENDS

29

