Approved by the UN RC on 15 December 2025
Endorsed by the USG/ERC OCHA on 17 December 2025

Fiji National Anticipatory Action Framework for Tropical
Cyclones
Fiji National Anticipatory Action Framework for Tropical Cyclones............................................ 1
1.

Introduction ............................................................................................................... 3

2.

Policy Setting and Governance .................................................................................... 5

3

2.1

Policy Setting ...................................................................................................... 5

2.2

Governance of the Framework ............................................................................. 7

Other Anticipatory Action Initiatives in Fiji .................................................................. 10
3.1

Meso-Level Anticipatory Insurance Scheme ...................................................... 10

4

The Risk/Hazard ....................................................................................................... 11

5

The Model: Forecasts, Triggers, and Activation Protocol ............................................. 12

6

5.1

The Model/Forecast .......................................................................................... 12

5.2

Trigger Conditions ............................................................................................. 12

5.3

Trigger Monitoring Process ................................................................................ 14

5.4

Activation Protocol ........................................................................................... 15

The Activities: Anticipatory Activities and Operational Plan ........................................ 17
6.1

Overview .......................................................................................................... 17

6.2

Anticipatory Activities Selection Criteria ............................................................ 17

6.3

Cluster-led Anticipatory Activities ..................................................................... 17

6.4 Community-based Anticipatory Activities ................................................................. 27
6.5 Cross-Cutting Services ............................................................................................ 27
6.6 Coordination, Targeting and Information Management during activation .................... 29
6.6 Preparedness and Operational Readiness ................................................................ 30
6.7 Community Sensitisation (Non-Alert Risk Communication) ...................................... 32
7

The Money: Pre-Arranged Financing........................................................................... 33
7.1 Financing Overview ................................................................................................. 33
7.2 Build Funding .......................................................................................................... 33
7.3 Pre-arranged financing: “Fuel” ................................................................................. 34

8

The Learning............................................................................................................. 37

9

Final Provisions ........................................................................................................ 39
1

Advocacy and Public Communication............................................................................ 39
Annex 1 – Sendai GAP policy brief on GBV and SRH ........................................................... 40
Annex 2 – Overview of Stakeholders .................................................................................. 41
Annex 3 – Historical Analysis ............................................................................................. 42
Annex 4 – Distribution Lists ............................................................................................... 44
Annex 5 – DRAFT Trigger Messages .................................................................................... 47
Annex 6 – DRAFT Trigger Information Messages .................................................................. 48
Annex 7 – Overview of Activities......................................................................................... 51
UN-funded Activities ..................................................................................................... 51
Fiji Red Cross Early Action Protocol ............................................................................... 52
Annex 8 – MoU MWCSP-MoF-WFP ..................................................................................... 53
Annex 9 - Common Early Warning Messages ..................................................................... 85
Annex 10 - Common Early Warning Messages Testing Results............................................. 90
Annex 11 – Coordination Standard Operating Procedure .................................................... 95
Annex 12 – IDA Forms ..................................................................................................... 100
Annex 13 – Awareness Sheet for Community Leaders....................................................... 102

2

1. Introduction
Pacific Island Countries are among the most vulnerable to natural hazards, particularly tropical
cyclones, whose impacts are being intensified by climate change. These hazards continue to
destroy homes, livelihoods, and essential infrastructure, with the greatest consequences borne
by the most vulnerable. Fiji has long recognised the need to strengthen preparedness, reduce
disaster losses, and build resilience. In this context, the Government of Fiji, through the
National Disaster Risk Management Office (NDRMO), decided to pilot Anticipatory Action (AA)
with support from the United Nations and humanitarian partners.
By using early warning systems and scientific advances in predicting disasters, AA maximises
the window of opportunity between the moment of prediction and the arrival of a specific
forecasted shock to trigger interventions that prevent or mitigate imminent humanitarian
impacts. AA is defined as acting ahead of predicted hazards to prevent or reduce acute
humanitarian impacts before they fully unfold. AA works best if triggers and decision-making
rules (the model) and activities (the delivery) are pre-agreed to guarantee the fast release of prearranged financing (the money). In line with best practices for AA, this framework pre-agrees the
tropical cyclone forecasting trigger and the activities which are launched thanks to pre-arranged
financing. In addition, documenting evidence and learning is part of the framework.
NDRMO led the development of a Collective Anticipatory Action Framework for Tropical
Cyclones, facilitated by the United Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
(OCHA) and with the support of the Pacific Humanitarian Team (PHT). The Framework was
designed as a government-led system to deliver early, pre-arranged assistance in the critical
window between a credible cyclone forecast and landfall. The initiative was enabled by a prearranged allocation from the Central Emergency Response Fund (CERF) and co-financing from
United Nations agencies, and is rooted in national systems and policies.
Following validation by the NDRMO, the Fiji Meteorological Service, the national cluster system,
and relevant line ministries, the Framework was first endorsed by the United Nations Resident
Coordinator for Fiji, Solomon Islands, Tonga, Tuvalu and Vanuatu in November 2023, and
subsequently by the United Nations Emergency Relief Coordinator. It was then formally
endorsed by the Cabinet of the Republic of Fiji in February 2024. This sequence of
endorsements provided both international recognition and high-level national legitimacy,
positioning Fiji as the first Pacific Island Country to adopt a nationally endorsed AA framework
for tropical cyclones.
During the pilot phase (2023–2025), the Framework catalysed a shift from reactive response to
proactive planning. It established a nationally owned trigger mechanism based on cyclone
forecasts, developed sectoral Standard Operating Procedures (SOPs), introduced joint early
warning messaging, and created harmonised financing arrangements. While no activation
occurred, the Framework strengthened national coordination, enhanced operational readiness,
and integrated anticipatory approaches into Fiji’s disaster preparedness architecture.
Two learning exercises informed the next phase. An independent Process Learning conducted
by the University of the South Pacific confirmed these achievements and highlighted the need
3

for stronger community sensitisation, broader sub-national engagement, diversified financing
and more systematic readiness monitoring. Separately, a May 2025 Framework Revision
Workshop —hosted by NDRMO with support from OCHA and the United Nations Agency for
Disaster Risk Reduction (UNDRR) and attended by all stakeholders—translated lessons into
practical adjustments to the framework: maintaining core activities; strengthening the trigger
(e.g., incorporating rainfall and population data); adapting interventions (e.g., a voucher
approach for selected health/protection actions); expanding community outreach; and aligning
financing with disaster-risk financing strategies.
On this basis, the Government and partners agreed to extend the Framework into a second
phase covering the 2025–2027 cyclone seasons. The revised Phase 2 Framework (2025–2027)
reflects these findings and recommendations. It consolidates the achievements of the pilot
phase while addressing identified gaps, ensuring that AA is further institutionalised, aligned with
Fiji’s disaster risk management priorities and better integrated with community-based
approaches. In line with best practices for AA, the Framework pre-defines the conditions under
which it will be activated, the financing arrangements that will be triggered, and the pre-agreed
activities to be implemented, while also including provisions to monitor and document its
impact.

4

2. Policy Setting and Governance
2.1

Policy Setting

The Fiji Anticipatory Action Framework for Tropical Cyclones is anchored in the country’s
broader disaster risk management and climate policy environment. Fiji has a strong foundation
of national legislation, strategies and institutional arrangements that provide the enabling
environment for AA.
The National Disaster Risk Management Act 20241 provides the overarching legal framework for
disaster governance in Fiji. It reaffirms national and sub-national disaster risk management
structures, mandates government agencies to budget for preparedness and risk reduction, and
creates a Disaster Risk Management Fund. Importantly, Section 61 of the Act requires the
NDRMO, in liaison with relevant agencies, to establish and maintain a people-centred, multihazard warning system. This includes not only hazard monitoring, forecasting, and
dissemination, but also “systems and processes that enable early or timely action to reduce
disaster risk” and “pre-agreed actions that may be taken to minimise impact of the hazard, in
accordance with forecasted hazard impact.” These provisions provide a clear legal foundation
for AA in Fiji.
The Act also establishes the procedures for declaring a State of Disaster. A National State of
Disaster may be declared by the Cabinet, on the advice of the National Disaster Risk
Management Council, when a hazard is “likely to cause or has caused” significant impact.
Divisional Commissioners and other delegated authorities may also declare divisional or local
states of disaster. This formulation — “likely to cause” — is particularly important for AA, as it
provides explicit legal backing for preparedness and early interventions before a hazard strikes.
In addition, Fiji’s National Disaster Risk Reduction Policy (2018–2030)2 and National Adaptation
Plan (NAP)3 prioritise strengthening preparedness, early warning systems, and proactive
responses to climate-related hazards. They identify tropical cyclones as a major climate hazard
that the country is facing and will continue to face in the future. The NAP outlines several
measures that Fiji can take to address the risks posed by tropical cyclones, including the
building of community resilience, as well as strengthening of early warning systems and
disaster response preparedness. The midterm review of the Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk
Reduction4 further identified the need to expand early warning and anticipatory approaches.

National Disaster Risk Management Act 2024, Republic of Fiji. https://www.ndmo.gov.fj/wpcontent/uploads/2024/12/NDRM-Act-2024.pdf
2
Fiji National Disaster Risk Reduction Policy 2018–2030, Republic of Fiji, available at:
https://www.preventionweb.net/publication/fiji-national-disaster-risk-reduction-policy-2018-2030
3
Republic of Fiji National Adaptation Plan: A pathway towards climate resilience 2018–2030, Ministry of
Economy, available at: https://www4.unfccc.int/sites/NAPC/Documents/Parties/NAP_Fiji.pdf.
4
Fiji Sendai Mid-Term Review Report 2023, NDRMO, available at: https://ndmo.gov.fj/wpcontent/uploads/2023/05/Fiji-Sendai-Mid-Term-Review-Report-2023.pdf
1

5

At the community level, the Community-Based Disaster Risk Management (CBDRM) Policy5
provides an entry point for embedding AA in local preparedness systems. The policy mentions
AA and forecast based financing as a key approach under Risk-Informed Development and
Finance, encouraging the development of triggers and pre-agreed plans to activate funding and
preparedness before disasters strike. AA is also being integrated into the annual National
Disaster Awareness Week and other public sensitisation initiatives, reinforcing its role as part of
national preparedness.
In alignment with these institutional and policy arrangements, the Government of Fiji, through
the Ministry of Finance and with support from partners, is currently developing a National
Disaster Risk Financing (DRF) Strategy, which remains under consultation. The strategy aims to
strengthen Fiji’s financial resilience to disasters by establishing an integrated framework for
mobilising and managing pre-arranged and contingent financing instruments. It seeks to ensure
timely and predictable access to funds before and after disasters, reducing fiscal shocks and
enabling faster recovery. The DRF Strategy builds on existing instruments such as the Pacific
Catastrophe Risk Insurance Company (PCRIC) parametric insurance,6 the World Bank’s
Catastrophe Deferred Drawdown Option (CAT-DDO),7 and the Contingency Emergency
Response Components (CERCs)8 embedded within sectoral projects. It also considers the
potential for integrating micro- and meso-level instruments, including adaptive social
protection and parametric insurance for households, MSMEs, and the agriculture sector under
the Pacific Insurance and Climate Adaptation Programme (PICAP).9
Once finalised, the DRF Strategy will provide a comprehensive policy framework to guide the
layering of financial instruments across sovereign, private, and community levels,
complementing existing risk reduction and preparedness investments. Importantly, it will offer a
critical policy entry point for embedding anticipatory financing mechanisms within national
disaster risk management and climate adaptation systems—enabling pre-arranged funding to
be released based on early warning information. By aligning with the Anticipatory Action
Framework and broader climate and fiscal policies, the DRF Strategy will help ensure that Fiji’s
disaster response is not only faster but also more risk-informed, sustainable, and financially
secure.
Anchoring on the Sendai Gender Action Plan (GAP), which aims to integrate gender-responsive
approaches to decrease gender-related disaster risk by 2030, a policy brief has been developed

The CBDRM Policy is currently under revision.
The Pacific Catastrophe Risk Insurance Company (PCRIC) is a regional risk-pooling facility that provides
sovereign parametric insurance products to Pacific Island Countries. Its Tropical Cyclone and Excess
Rainfall policies provide rapid, pre-arranged payouts based on modelled windspeed or rainfall intensity
once pre-defined thresholds are met, enabling governments to access immediate liquidity following
severe weather events. For more information, see https://pcric.org/tropical-cyclone/ and
https://pcric.org/excess-rainfall/
7
https://documents.worldbank.org/en/publication/documentsreports/documentdetail/099053024122674516
8
https://openknowledge.fao.org/bitstreams/4fc526cb-0454-48fa-b9e8-48098eda8910/download
9
https://www.uncdf.org/pacific-insurance-and-climate-adaptation-programme
5
6

6

to assist Pacific Islands Countries and Territories (PICTs) and provide evidence-based
recommendations on how to integrate and strengthen interventions on sexual and reproductive
health (SRH) and gender-based violence (GBV) into Disaster Risk Reduction (DRR), AA and
climate change policies (Annex 1). This is to ensure that people, especially women and girls
have access to essential lifesaving health services during and after a disaster. Gaps regarding
SRH and GBV can hinder effective planning and coordination across Government Ministries and
clusters of fragments of the response. Strengthening Government leadership, cross-sector
coordination and prioritization of SRH and GBV, in partnership with communities, particularly
women and youth – led organizations, is essential to building inclusive, resilient systems. This
policy brief provides practical, evidence-based recommendations to bridge these gaps
governance by focusing on 4 key areas; 1) Institutionalize SRH and GBV within DRR, climate and
AA policies and protocols, 2) Strengthen inclusivity through community leadership and
localisation 3) Expand flexible, gender responsive financing for DRR.
Finally, the national cluster system, officially recognised under government leadership, brings
together the work of humanitarian actors under the stewardship of relevant line ministries,
forms the backbone of humanitarian response in Fiji and provides a natural institutional home
for AA planning and coordination.
Together, these policies and commitments establish a strong enabling environment for AA,
ensuring that the revised Framework is fully aligned with Fiji’s legal and policy mandates in
disaster risk management, climate adaptation, and humanitarian response.

2.2

Governance of the Framework

The governance of the Anticipatory Action Framework for Tropical Cyclones is rooted in Fiji’s
disaster management system and anchored in the National Disaster Risk Management Act
2024. The Act mandates the National Disaster Risk Management Office (NDRMO) as the
coordinating authority, under the oversight of the National Disaster Risk Management Council
and with ultimate political authority resting with the Cabinet of the Republic of Fiji.
The Framework was developed under NDRMO leadership, with triggers designed in
collaboration with the Fiji Meteorological Service (FMS), and anticipatory activities elaborated
by the line ministries which lead the national clusters together with the PHT and its dedicated
Anticipatory Action Technical Working Group (PHT AA TWG). All activities under the Framework,
implemented both by line ministries and humanitarian partners, were validated by the NDRMO
and the respective line ministries, ensuring national ownership and high-level oversight. A full
list of stakeholders engaged in the Framework’s design and validation is provided in Annex 2.
A central pillar of governance is the national cluster system, which provides the operational
platform through which anticipatory actions are coordinated and delivered. Each AA activity is
channelled through the relevant government-led cluster. Members of the PHT support these
clusters with technical expertise, operational capacity and additional resources. This
governance arrangement ensures that pre-agreed interventions are embedded in existing

7

preparedness and response arrangements, that accountability runs through the cluster system,
and that there is a seamless transition from AA to humanitarian response when needed.
At the divisional and sub-national levels, governance is exercised through structures
established under the NDRM Act 2024. Divisional Commissioners play a central role in
coordination, readiness monitoring and communication, working closely with Provincial
Administrators, District Officers and community committees. Divisional Disaster Risk
Management Committees, together with Provincial and District Disaster Committees, provide
formal mechanisms to ensure that AA decisions are communicated, adapted and implemented
locally. At the community level, Community-based Disaster Risk Management Committees,
alongside faith-based and civil society organizations, play a critical role in last-mile
dissemination, community sensitization and feedback. This depicts that this framework favours
a decentralised approach with participatory humanitarianism.
This layered governance approach, with the cluster system providing horizontal coordination
across sectors, and the divisional and provincial structures ensuring vertical integration from
the national to the community level — ensures that AA is nationally led, legally grounded, and
implemented in partnership with all relevant stakeholders.

8

9

3 Other Anticipatory Action Initiatives in Fiji
In parallel to the Collective Anticipatory Action Framework for Tropical Cyclones, other
initiatives are advancing anticipatory approaches in Fiji through complementary models and
financing mechanisms.

3.1

Meso-Level Anticipatory Insurance Scheme

An innovative meso-level anticipatory insurance scheme was piloted under the Pacific
Insurance and Climate Adaptation Programme (PICAP), jointly implemented by the United
Nations Capital Development Fund (UNCDF) as the convening agency, the United Nations
Development Programme (UNDP) as the administrative agency and the United Nations
University Institute for Environment and Human Security (UNU-EHS) as the technical agency,
with technical and funding support from the UNDRR.10
The scheme links pre-arranged insurance payouts to early-warning triggers derived from
forecasted tropical cyclone windspeeds, allowing community cooperatives to access funds 24–
48 hours before an expected event. The anticipatory component releases between 10 and 20
percent of the insured sum once pre-defined thresholds are met, followed by post-event
payouts of up to 80 percent based on verified windspeed data.
Launched in 2023 by Sun Insurance Company Limited with approval from the Reserve Bank of
Fiji, the pilot initially covered four cooperatives — the Cane Farmers’ Cooperative Savings &
Loans Association, Fiji Rice Limited, the Sugarcane Growers Council and the Tailevu Dairy
Farmers Cooperative Association — representing more than 10,000 members. The
policyholders receive guidance on the use of payouts based on community consultations and
focus group discussions conducted with UNDRR and PICAP. Following strong interest and no
trigger activation in 2023–2024, the pilot has been extended into 2024–2025 and expanded to
twelve communities nationwide.
The anticipatory insurance model provides a private-sector-led pre-financing solution that
complements the government-led anticipatory action framework. It reduces the financial
burden on government and humanitarian actors by shifting part of the disaster-risk cost to the
insurance sector while enabling communities to act early. This approach represents one of the
first global examples of anticipatory insurance at the meso-level targeting sudden onset events
and aligning with Fiji’s ambition to integrate pre-arranged, risk-informed financing across its
national disaster risk management and resilience agenda.
PICAP and UNDRR are now exploring opportunities to scale the scheme to other communities
in Fiji and across the Pacific, while ensuring coherence with government policies on disaster
risk financing and anticipatory action.

https://www.uncdf.org/article/8428/pacifics-first-anticipatory-action-pilot-insurance-scheme-toprovide-fijian-farming-groups-with-funds-to-better-prepare-for-cyclones
10

10

4 The Risk/Hazard
Fiji is one of the most vulnerable countries in the world to tropical cyclones with significant
impact on infrastructure, the economy, and the Fijian people, displacing thousands, creating
humanitarian suffering, and causing loss of life. Beyond destructive wind speeds, tropical
cyclones in Fiji are often accompanied by intense rainfall, resulting in flash floods, riverine
flooding, and storm surges that further exacerbate the country’s exposure and vulnerability.
Since 1969, there have been 33 tropical cyclones (TCs) (Category 1 or higher) that have passed
within 10 km of Fiji, and 16 that made landfall. Some of the most devastating cyclones to hit Fiji
in recent history include Cyclone Winston (2016), the strongest cyclone ever recorded in the
Southern Hemisphere, Cyclone Yasa (2020) which was the second-strongest cyclone on record
to make landfall in Fiji, and Cyclone Harold (2020). For these three most recent storms,
international support was mobilized, including financial support from the Central Emergency
Response Fund (CERF). Cyclones can also cause significant damage from rainfall while having
relatively low wind speed. For example, Cyclone Cody (2022) affected around 70,000 people in
Fiji while only being a Category 1 cyclone. Its heavy rains (over 200 mm, averaged over the whole
country) caused significant flooding.
Climate change leading to warmer oceans is having a significant impact on tropical cyclones,
making them more frequent, intense, and destructive. In addition, climate change is also
expected to lead to stronger storm surges, more extreme rainfall events, and rising sea levels.
Fiji’s government estimates (NDC) that by 2050, over 6.5 per cent of Fiji’s GDP could be lost due
to tropical cyclones and floods, with the number of people being pushed into poverty every year
increasing by 25 per cent. While the Government of Fiji has made significant investments in
disaster preparedness and resilience, the country remains at high risk from the loss and
damage caused by tropical cyclones.

11

5 The Model: Forecasts, Triggers, and Activation Protocol
5.1

The Model/Forecast

Cyclone Track Forecast
World Meteorological Organization’s Tropical Cyclone Programme, the Regional Specialized
Meteorological Centre (RSMC) in Nadi has the responsibility for detecting and forecasting
tropical cyclones (TCs) in its zone of responsibility, which is from the equator to latitude 25°S
and from longitude 160°E to 120°W (spanning the international date line)11. As such, RSMC
Nadi’s TC forecasts are the internationally recognized authoritative source for TCs in this zone.
RSMC Nadi is operated by Fiji Meteorological Services (FMS).
RSMC Nadi issues official TC track forecasts with a 72-hour lead time, which include the TC’s
forecasted category and position, as well as 5-day TC formation risk outlooks. This framework
uses the official 72-hour track forecast for its action trigger. To provide more advance warning
for implementation, this framework also includes a readiness trigger, which is based on RSMC
Nadi’s unofficial 120-hour forecast (an additional 48 hours)12.

Observed rainfall
The NASA IMERG dataset is the lowest-latency publicly available global rainfall dataset. It offers
daily rainfall at a 0.1-degree resolution at “early”, “late”, and “final” times, each corresponding
to an increasing latency and accuracy. For the purposes of an observational trigger, the “late”
option was selected as a balance between latency and accuracy, which is issued roughly half a
day after the rainfall has occurred.

5.2

Trigger Conditions

This framework will be triggered by a tropical system13 that either:
•

is forecasted by RSMC Nadi to cause winds of at least 64 knots14 in zones where at least
5,000 people live15, OR

https://community.wmo.int/en/tropical-cyclone-regional-bodies
Due to the relative uncertainty of the additional 48 hours of forecast, this part of the forecast is used
only to determine whether the readiness trigger has been met.
13
This includes tropical depressions, tropical storms, and tropical cyclones.
14
Sometimes referred to as ”hurricane-strength“ winds. Note that 64 knots (118 km/h) is the minimum
value for a tropical cyclone to be a Category 3 on the Australian scale (used by RSMC Nadi)
https://www.bom.gov.au/resources/learn-and-explore/tropical-cyclone-knowledge-centre/tropicalcyclone-categories
15
Based on the WorldPop 2020 1km UN-adjusted population distribution
https://hub.worldpop.org/geodata/summary?id=46199
11
12

12

•

is observed to cause16 at least 190 mm of rainfall17 over two consecutive days, averaged over
the whole country.

Every time RSMC Nadi produces a tropical cyclone track forecast, it will be evaluated by an
automated script to determine whether the trigger conditions have been met.
The framework follows a 3-stage trigger activation, each part of which is triggered based on the
lead time of the points in the forecast, or the observational data:
•
•
•

Readiness trigger: If the wind field indicated by the 120-hour forecast meets the trigger
conditions, the readiness trigger is activated.
Action trigger: If the wind field indicated by the forecast truncated up to a lead time of
72 hours meets the trigger conditions, the action trigger is activated.
Observational trigger: If the average rainfall over the whole country during two
consecutive days meets the threshold (190 mm), the observational trigger is activated.

By definition, the action trigger has a detection/confirmation rate of 100% (i.e., any cyclone
whose actual track meets the trigger conditions will cause the framework to activate). This is
because the actual track of the cyclone is effectively included in the forecast, as the forecasted
position at a lead time of 0 hours.
The historical performance statistics of the trigger are shown in the table below.

The cyclone is deemed to ”cause” rainfall if the rainfall occurs while the centre of the storm is
observed by RSMC Nadi to be within 250 km of Fiji, plus one day on either side (resulting in a minimum
span of three days).
17
Based on the IMERG v07b Late satellite precipitation measurement
https://gpm1.gesdisc.eosdis.nasa.gov/data/GPM_L3/GPM_3IMERGDL.07/
16

13

5.3

Trigger Monitoring Process

While this Framework remains valid for a two-year period (2025–2027), activation may only
occur between 1 October and 31 May each year, corresponding to Fiji’s official tropical cyclone
(1 November to 30 April) season extended by one month on each end, during which the triggers
are actively monitored.

Readiness and Action Triggers
Every tropical cyclone track forecast produced by RSMC Nadi is evaluated to determine
whether the trigger conditions have been met. The process involves the following steps:
1. A 120-hour forecast is produced by the Fiji Meteorological Services Senior Scientific
Officer on duty on the Tropical Cyclone Forecasting Bench.
2. The Officer emails the forecast, in its standardized CSV export format from the TC
Module software to the Data Science team at the OCHA Centre for Humanitarian Data.18
3. An automated script19 evaluates whether the trigger conditions have been met for either
the readiness trigger or the activation trigger.
4. The automated script sends an email to the Distribution List defined in Annex 4 to notify
that the trigger has been met.
As a backup to the above steps, the Data Science team email will also be included on emails of
the 72-hour official forecast from RSMC Nadi to the NDRMO, which happen after the 120-hour
has been truncated to 72 hours (an already existing activity, undertaken for the NDRMO to
produce impact forecasts).
This process is outlined in the figure below.

18 data.science@humdata.org
19 All code used for analysis in this framework is available publicly at https://github.com/OCHA-DAP/pa-aa-fji-storms

14

Observational Trigger
Every day, an automated OCHA CHD script reads the IMERG data from the NASA server and
determines whether the trigger conditions have been met. If the trigger conditions are met, an
email will be automatically sent to Distribution List A, as above.

5.4

Activation Protocol

The activation protocol outlines how the Framework is automatically activated once the trigger
conditions are met. Activation means that the anticipatory activities detailed in Section 6 can
be carried out at readiness and activation triggers as defined by the plan, and that pre-arranged
financing becomes available as outlined in Section 7.
Stakeholders are notified about the trigger conditions being met via an automated email
produced by OCHA. To support geographic prioritisation, OCHA will produce an information
email on the cyclone track (email sample in Annex 6).
Any triggering of the framework should lead to action. However, for theoretically possible outlier
cases where a track of a storm clearly would result in minimal impact, the Resident
Coordinator, in consultation with the government, may pause any activation.
Who
RSMC Nadi / Fiji
Meteorological Services
OCHA Centre for
Humanitarian Data

CERF

What
Send 120-hour forecast to
OCHA Centre for Humanitarian
Data
Evaluate whether trigger has
been met, and send email to
distribution list A (official trigger
email) and B (complementary
trigger information email)
When a readiness trigger is
issued (or an action trigger
without a previous readiness
trigger), CERF will immediately

How
Email of CSV to
data.science@humdata.org

When
As soon as forecast is
produced, and before forecast
is truncated to 72 hours

Using automated script

Automatically as soon as
forecast CSV is received from
RSMC Nadi

Endorsed framework and
CERF application by RC and
Emergency Relief Coordinator
(ERC)

As triggers are reached

15

send the approval letters to the
agencies

Implementing Partners
(UN agencies, NGOs,
Red Cross, etc.)

Fiji Red Cross Society

Upon activation and receipt of
the approval letters,
implementing partners will
proceed to implement
readiness and/or action
activities.
When the activation trigger is
reached, pre-approved funds
from the IFRC Disaster
Response Emergency Fund
(DREF) will be transferred to
FRCS from IFRC Suva for agreed
early actions.

Pre-approved CERF approval
letters to UN agencies
As described in the agencyspecific project proposals and
implementing SoPs.

As triggers are reached

Direct contact/Liaison
between RC and NDRMO
followed by email notification
to distribution list A (Annex 4)

Once the framework is
activated, in the possible outlier
cases where a track of a storm
clearly would result in minimal
impact.

Direct contact between RC
and NDRMO (it can be
facilitated by OCHA HoO)
followed by email notification
to distribution list A (Annex 4)

Once the framework is
activated, in the possible outlier
cases where a track of a storm
clearly would result in minimal
impact.

The FRCS can pause the
activation process upon
discussion with the NDRMO
NDRMO

The NDRMO can discuss with
the RC if it is the case to pause
the activation

16

6 The Activities: Anticipatory Activities and Operational Plan
6.1

Overview

Tropical cyclones and rainfall have a profound, devastating impact on communities in Fiji
experiencing greatest vulnerability. These populations, often living in precarious housing and
lacking essential resources, bear the brunt of disasters. While they possess the knowledge and
skills to mitigate the impacts of cyclones, they often lack the necessary materials and resources
to effectively reduce their vulnerability to them.
There is only a very short window of opportunity between a trigger and the impact of tropical
cyclones in Fiji. In addition, some areas are remote and difficult to access, especially with
impeding storms. This combination may create challenges to carry out AA in full before the
impact of the cyclone. This is why the partners have resolved to act as fast as possible and as
anticipatory as possible once a trigger is reached. However, in some circumstances, especially
for remote areas, assistance may only reach communities after the cyclone has passed, turning
ex- ante anticipatory action into ex-post early action.

6.2

Anticipatory Activities Selection Criteria

Anticipatory actions aim to mitigate the impacts of out-of-the-ordinary tropical cyclones and
heavy rainfall by targeting those people who face the greatest vulnerability. The following criteria
were applied to select the pre-agreed activities:
1. Anticipatory character: Is the action effective in preventing or reducing the humanitarian
impact of the shock?
2. Ability to deliver within the window of opportunity: Is it possible to carry out the action
effectively with the available forecast lead time, i.e. in the window of opportunity?
3. Operational capacity: Do the agency and its IPs have the institutional capacity
(thematic, logistic, administrative, financial, human resources) to implement the action
effectively given the lead time and scale?
4. No regrets approach: In the case of a false alarm, will the proposed actions benefit
rather than negatively affecting the targeted population?

6.3

Cluster-led Anticipatory Activities

Cluster-led anticipatory activities represent the operational core of the Framework. Each
activity has been identified and validated by the government-led national clusters in
collaboration with the relevant UN agencies and partners. The actions are designed to address
priority humanitarian needs that can be mitigated ahead of impact and are implemented
through existing coordination structures under the leadership of the respective line ministries.
The activities are delivered through different projects under the Framework and financed
through multiple pre-arranged channels, as outlined in Section 7 on financing.
A detailed summary of activities by project is provided in Annex 7.

17

Protection
Activity 1: Multi-Purpose Cash Assistance to existing recipients of social support schemes
identified by the Government
Leads: Ministry of Women, Children and Social Protection (MWCSP) and World Food
Programme (WFP)
Partners: MWCSP, World Food Programme, Ministry of Finance. The tripartite MoU between
MoF, MWCSP and WFP describing the collaboration can be found in Annex 8.
Objective: Mitigate the impact of the cyclones on household food and nutrition security and
general wellbeing of their families.
Description: Given the short lead time, unconditional multi-purpose cash transfer (MPC) is a
major component of the framework. WFP, in partnership with the MWCSP, will support a
projected 15,000 households (75,000 people) with anticipatory cash transfers in areas
identified to be in the tropical cyclone’s path at the time of the activation trigger. A transfer value
of FJD200 endorsed by the Fiji cash working group will be transferred by the DSP to targeted
households. In the absence of a minimum expenditure basket, transfer value determination was
based on the default transfer value and aligned to Fiji basic needs poverty line.
WFP will channel resources through the government for provision of cash assistance to the
existing recipients of social support schemes identified by the Government under four parts of
the national social protection scheme namely: 1) the Family Assistance Scheme, 2) the Care
and Protection Allowance, 3) the Disability Allowance and 4) the Social Pension Scheme. This
MPC is designed to enable targeted households to prepare for the cyclone (evacuation costs,
protecting livestock and homes etc.), buy essential needs (food, medicines etc.) and mitigate
the impact of the cyclones on household food and nutrition security and general wellbeing of
their families. WFP will collaborate with government and UN agencies in the development of
early warning messages under the leadership of NDRMO and support the Department of Social
Protection (DSP) to disseminate early earning messages including cash assistance messages to
the final list of targeted households. The DSP will engage field-based staff to support
community sensitization about the tropical cyclone and potential for assistance before impact.
Messages about the assistance will be designed and delivered in such a way that they do not
raise expectations for cash transfers in areas not affected by the tropical cyclone.
Challenges and potential improvements in the future:
Sudden onset disasters, such as tropical cyclones, affect everyone in their path, whereas the
use of a social registry for targeting restricts anticipatory support, such as multipurpose cash, to
households in the social protection beneficiary registry. In addition, while the use of the
national social protection beneficiary registry contributes to the strategic objective of
strengthening government systems, there is limited oversight over inclusion and exclusion
errors when a disaster occurs. As a mitigating measure, regular deduplication, graduation, and
retargeting to include households below the poverty line can increase the likelihood that the
most vulnerable individuals will be included on the beneficiary list. While the above is a medium
18

to long-term solution, there is a clear need for early action plans, particularly when using the
government beneficiary registry. The early actions can be activated promptly after the disaster
has passed to support and prioritize those who were affected but not targeted through
government beneficiary registry (horizontal expansion). The AA pilot is an opportunity to
showcase how existing government policies and legislative frameworks for financing disaster
risk management, social protection, and climate change adaptation can reduce impact of
climate disaster through anticipatory actions. This strategy ensures that AA interventions are
localized, owned by the government and hence sustainable and cost-effective.
Activity 2: Distribution of Pacific customized Dignity Kits for GBV risk mitigation
Leads: MWCSP and United Nations Population Fund (UNFPA)
Partners: MWCSP and Fiji Disabled Peoples Federation
Objective: To ensure women, girls, and persons with disabilities receive essential hygiene and
menstrual health supplies through timely anticipatory actions that are pre-positioned and
distribute kits before disasters, reducing GBV risks and promoting safety, dignity, and protection
during emergencies.
Description: Partnering closely with MWCSP, UNFPA will provide essential dignity kits for GBV
risk mitigation and dignity of women women and girls in forecasted cyclone impact areas.
UNFPA’s intervention has a strategic emphasis on minimizing life-threatening risks associated
with GBV. These efforts encompass the distribution of Pacific customized kits, complemented
by informational messages stressing the importance of seeking timely support and care from
trained healthcare professionals and service providers. These kits comprise of the following:
Dignity Kits for women aged 15-49, including those with disabilities and menstrual health kits
for girls ages 10 and above. The comprehensive strategy aims to safeguard the health and
wellbeing of women and girls in the face of impeding tropical cyclones, addressing their unique
needs and vulnerabilities.
Challenges & Potential Improvement in the future
•

•

•

Limited prepositioning capacity: Current storage and logistical arrangements may not be
sufficient to ensure timely distribution to all high-risk areas before disaster onset. Future
efforts to expand warehouse capacity and improve last-mile delivery systems in
coordination with local government and CSO networks.
Targeting and data gaps: Limited sex, age, and disability-disaggregated data can affect
accurate targeting of women and girls most at risk. Strengthening data collection systems
and community-based mapping will improve equitable coverage.
Monitoring and feedback: Limited real-time monitoring and feedback mechanisms hinder
adaptive improvements. Establishing simple, confidential feedback channels—especially
for women and persons with disabilities—will help ensure kits meet user needs and
protection standards.

Lead: MWCSP and UN Women

19

Partners: Department of Women & Department of Child Services and Social Protection, and Fiji
Safety and Protection Cluster Members.
Objective: To ensure safety and protection concerns are assessed and appropriately factored
into post needs assessments and responses of the different key sectors.
Description: From the alert or trigger phase, social welfare officers and women’s interest
officers in the rural and maritime areas, as part of their preparedness activities to respond, are
usually already moving through location where their services are based to check on the
facilities, the services it’s meant to provide in safety and protection. During the past year, the
cluster had also revised their rapid assessment form to be deployed on Kobo. A series of
workshops has been held in the various divisions over the past year to finalize the form. During
the readiness phase, the officers will be refreshed on the use of the form on Kobo and how to
collect protection data. This will be facilitated online whilst in their various rural locations.
Challenges and potential improvements in the future:
•

•

The designation of staff (usually public servants) that would support protection
assessments will only be determined at the time of the looming emergency. In future,
the ministry, as part of their preparedness could already obtain a list of individual staff
that would be on call and able to deploy for assessments as soon as restriction to
movements has been lifted.
Virtual training will only depend on the strength of the network in the divisions and the
available devices which assessors will use for accessing Kobo and collecting data. In
future, a series of data collection devices could be acquired and issued out on receipt of
a warning (as an asset of the organization) so that there won’t be any issues in accessing
the kobo form. Data credit can also be pushed out to the sim card on the devices to
ensure connectivity during the refresher trainings.

Health
Activity 4: Health and Nutrition Cluster Coordination
Leads: Ministry of Health and Medical Services (MHMS) and World Health Organisation (WHO)
Partners: Fiji MHMS, Fiji Health and Nutrition Cluster, Adventist Development and Relief Agency
(ADRA), Empower Pacific, International Federation of the Red Cross (IFRC), International
Planned Parenthood Federation (IPPF), The Pacific Community (SPC), Save the Children, United
Nations Population Fund (UNFPA), United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF), World Health
Organization (WHO).
Objective: To work in support of the MHMS and other national authorities to improve the health
and nutrition outcomes of affected populations through timely, predictable, appropriate and
effective coordination of health and nutrition action in emergencies.
Description:
• Support Fiji’s Health and Nutrition Cluster in coordinating national-level preparedness,
emergency response and recovery efforts, as requested/directed by MOH leadership.

20

•
•

Support Fiji’s Health and Nutrition Cluster with assessments, preparedness and service
delivery in emergencies through the provision of technical support, operational support
(i.e. implementation), and in-kind support, as requested/directed by MOH leadership.
Support Fiji’s Health and Nutrition Cluster to identify core advocacy concerns, including
resource requirements, and contribute key messages to advocacy outlets.

Challenges and potential improvements in the future: A resilient health system must include
the ability to both maintain the provision of basic health care and respond to health system
shocks. A strong and equitable health system is resilient in the face of potential threats,
including but not limited to the climate crisis, public health emergencies and disasters. The
ongoing work of health and nutrition cluster partners to build a resilient health system will
support Fiji throughout the preparedness, anticipatory action, response and recovery phases.
Activity 5: Health promotion
Lead: FRCS and MHMS
Description: In coordination with the MHMS, Fiji Red Cross will disseminate tailored health
alerts and prevention messages, focused on relevant water and vector borne diseases,
including LTDD. These timely messages will reinforce programming being undertaken by the Fiji
Red Cross health team (funded through other sources) to strengthen epidemic and pandemic
preparedness and prevention across Fiji. A minimum of 400HHs will be reached through these
health promotion messages.
Activity 6: Multi-Purpose, Unconditional Cash Assistance for Term High Risk pregnant women
identified by the Ministry of Health and Medical Services
Leads: MHMS and United Nations Population Fund (UNFPA)
Partners: MHMS, Medical Services Pacific, Reproductive and Family Health Association of Fiji.
Objective: To safeguard the health and dignity, of pregnant women and girls in cyclone-prone
areas through anticipatory actions that ensure timely access to life-saving maternal and
reproductive health services before, during, and immediately after disasters.
Description: UNFPA in partnership with MHMS will support a projected 1500 households (750
high risk term pregnant women) with multipurpose unconditional anticipatory cash in time of
activation trigger to support access to lifesaving safe delivery and essential newborn care.
The transfer value of approximately FJD 224 (UN USD-FJD exchange rate: 2.24) has been
informed by MHMS after three divisional consultations with health workers including those
based in rural remote locations. The value has been decided based on the cost of transportation
in health emergencies from the community to sub- divisional level health facility for life saving
health services.
UNFPA had multi stakeholder consultation with financial service providers to ensure timely
delivery of cash and is working on finalizing an agreement with the Vodafone Fiji and Digicel to
ensure timely delivery of the cash during anticipatory action.

21

Beneficiary data will be profiled and shared by MHMS by sub-division which will be then put on
common beneficiary data platform with access to UNFPA and financial service providers. For
risk mitigation, two accesses will be provided to UNFPA, one for the unloader and one for the
approval before the cash is disbursed. Data protection measures have been put in place by the
mobiles service provider, and the beneficiary will have to be the primary recipient registered on
these planforms. UNFPA is working on designing one pager messages for the beneficiary to
advocate for the intended use of cash and not to raise expectations.
Challenges and potential improvements in the future:
Reaching women & girls who live in the remote rural setting where access to mobile network
coverage is limited and beneficiary most in need for this assistance can be a challenge
therefore UNFPA is expecting to learn from this pilot and look at ways to extend access to
assistance in the non- coverage areas in future frameworks.
Timely Data sharing can be challenge due to women booking late for antenatal care and losing
out on the much-needed assistance however a cut date had to be determined for beneficiary to
be profiled and entered in the system. However, UNFPA is working with MHMS financial service
providers to ensure a more flexible to ensure more beneficiaries can be profiled and entered
into the system to accommodate late bookers.

Water, Sanitation and Hygiene (WASH)
Activity 7: Distribution of WASH Kits
Leads: MHMS and UNICEF
Partners: MHMS, Ministry of Education and Human Resource Development, WASH Cluster
CSO partners (Contingency partnerships in progress).
Objective: Mitigate the impact of the cyclones on access to water and sanitation services and
ensuring effective hygiene practices.
Description: UNICEF will work with the MHMS to improve and maintain access to Water,
Sanitation, and Hygiene (WASH), through the following activities:
•
•
•
•
•

Coordinate the WASH cluster response with technical advice, such as assessments,
(inter-)cluster coordination, information management (4Ws) and reporting.
Prepositioning of WASH related non-food items at likely impacted evacuation centres
and key public infrastructures (hygiene kits, water containers, menstrual hygiene
management supplies).
Support coordination and innovation management across government led WASH,
cluster.
Targeted support at evacuation centres to ensure WASH response is gender and
disability sensitive.
UNICEF will monitor and evaluate the implementation of the project to measure the
impact of anticipatory action in cooperation with the Government counterparts.

22

Challenges and potential improvements in the future:
Much work needs to be done to improve preparedness in Fiji including training for cluster
coordinators and information managers, onboarding of contingency partnerships for rapid
response, increasing number of long-term agreements with contractors to deliver local
supplies, review and strengthen local long-term agreements with Non-Food Items (NFIs)
suppliers. These are all ongoing actions but as cyclone season arrives are still in progress to
develop and may not fully be in place if there is an early activation. Contingency partnerships
with local NGOs are being considered as an alternative option to overcome some of these
challenges.
Activity 8: Distribution of Jerry Cans and Soap
Laed: Fiji Red Cross Society
Objective: To mitigate the hygiene-related and waterborne disease outbreaks resulting from
water source contamination because of TCs and associated extensive flooding.
Description: Fiji Red Cross will distribute jerry cans and soap so HHs can collect and safely
store water in advance of the event. The distribution of jerry cans will be guided by the
information provided by the National Disaster Risk Management Office (NDRMO) and through
ongoing communication with WASH cluster members, particularly UNICEF. The specific
locations for distribution will be determined based on the projected cyclone path. A total of
400HHs will be selected, using agreed criteria for identifying those who are at risk of greatest
vulnerability. Each HH will receive two jerry cans and soap. Fiji Red Cross will adopt the 'no
regret approach' as outlined in the national Anticipatory Action Framework to ensure resources
are allocated efficiently and effectively, minimizing the potential for missed opportunities.

Shelter
Activity 9: Distribution of Shelter Strengthening Kits
Leads: Ministry of Rural & Maritime Development and Disaster Management, UN International
Organisation for Migration (IOM), Fiji Red Cross
Partners: Ministry of Rural & Maritime Development and Disaster Management, IOM, IFRC, Fiji
Red Cross, Habitat for Humanity
Objective: To minimize the damage caused by cyclones to weak shelters belonging to
vulnerable community members.
Description: IOM and the Fiji Red Cross, with technical and coordination support through Fiji’s
Shelter cluster and IFRC, will work with active Shelter Cluster members, agencies, offices, and
organisations to provide the following:
•
•

IEC materials on shelter reinforcement and the basics of tying down a shelter, as well as
on safe evacuation and local service providers in the event of an emergency.
Ropes, fasteners, screws, tarpaulins, and other shelter materials to support the
strengthening of shelters ahead of the landfall of a cyclone.
23

•

Construction Tools to support communities in the shelter strengthening process.

At readiness trigger, Fiji Red Cross will conduct training with communities on how to use safe
shelter kits as well as raise awareness with communities about securing houses, removing
potential flying objects, and trimming branches around houses to mitigate possible damages.
Challenges and potential improvements in the future:
There are several envisaged challenges to shelter interventions conducted within the AA
Framework, the majority of which revolve around the provision of support to the most vulnerable
or in need communities. Three core challenges have been discussed amongst the National
Shelter Cluster members: 1) with shelter materials often spiking in cost after a cyclone makes
landfall, deploying prepositioned kits before landfall leaves a risk of supporting households who
may be less in need than others following landfall. With the spike in price and less prepositioned
kits, response efforts may be hampered. 2) The timeframe of the AA activities leaves little room
for capacity building, so interventions will need to largely rely on construction knowledge
already present in any given community. The need to manage expectations for what can be
achieved in this window, as well as focusing targeting on communities with experience in
repairing/strengthening shelters, is a challenge. 3) Reaching maritime islands will pose a
significant challenge to the cluster as most warehouses and stocks are in Viti Levu and Vanua
Levu, with the greatest concentration in Suva and Nadi. Movement to maritime islands right
before a cyclone may be too high of a risk.

Education
Activity 10: Delivery of Learning Materials
Leads: Ministry of Education and Human Resource Development (MEHRD) and UNICEF
Partners: Education Cluster CSO partners.
Objective: Ensure that children return to safe learning environments and are provided with
relevant learning resources to continue their education.
Description: To provide vulnerable children access to learning, UNICEF will distribute schoolin-a box kits to targeted schools. Education cluster would support teachers/students with PSSand Refresher training for PFA providers to be on standby. Quick improvements to the school’s
buildings to reduce the risk of damage from cyclones (reinforcing roofs, securing windows,
doors, and equipment etc will be undertaken).
•

Coordinate the Education cluster response with technical advice, such as assessments,
(inter-)cluster coordination, information management (4Ws) and reporting.
• Prepositioning of education-related items at schools (tents, school kits).
• Support coordination and innovation management across government-led Education
cluster.
• UNICEF will monitor and evaluate the implementation of the project to measure the
impact of AA in cooperation with the Government counterparts.
Challenges and potential improvements in the future:

24

•
•

Detailed data on school populations and vulnerability is not available. Better data in the
future can lead to better targeting of supplies and improved prepositioning.
Tents appropriate as an emergency response only and adequate recovery planning
needed to ensure they are not used for prolonged periods. Local expertise and capacity
to erect tents without training is limited. Further training will be needed in the future to
support first responders.

Food Security & Livelihood
Activity 11: Fishing-boat Strengthening Kits and Hermetic Dry Bags Distribution
Leads: Ministry of Agriculture and Waterways, Ministry of Fisheries and Forestry, Food and
Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO), Fiji Red Cross
Objective: Reducing the loss of livelihoods by securing boats, tools, and cash crops.
Description: To mitigate the potential impacts on the agriculture sector, FAO and the Fiji Red
Cross, in agreement with the Ministry of Agriculture and Department of Fisheries, will distribute
fishing-boat strengthening kits to at-risk fisherfolk and water-tight drums to farmers. The fishingboat strengthening kits will enable fisherfolk to pull their boats ashore and store them in secure
areas such as mangroves or along sandbars, where they can be tightly secured. Hermetic dry
bags will present a viable solution for farmers to securely store their cash crops, providing a dry
sanctuary that mitigates the risk of damage. It has dual purpose: firstly, to facilitate the
preservation of harvested crops, and secondly, to provide a repository for clippings for
replanting. By pre-emptively stockpiling crops prior to the cyclone's arrival, the potential for
crop damage and loss can be mitigated. The decision to use the bag for either crops/fishing
gear, or both, will be at the discretion of the household. This will be complemented by early
warning messages delivered to high-risk households in accordance with the established
communication protocols outlined by NDRMO and other UN agencies.
Challenges and potential improvements in the future: One of the primary obstacles is related
to logistics. It will be crucial to preposition and store items in advance of the season to
maximize their impact. While the necessary items can be largely be sourced locally, they are
predominantly found in Suva or Nadi, with the hermetic bags coming in from Australia. Ensuring
their accessibility from various locations across the country and maintaining their safety in
readily accessible warehouses will be of utmost importance. As we progress, we'll need to
refine and scale up this process, envisioning what the expansion might entail. This will require
collaboration with the Ministry of Agriculture and Department of Fisheries, building on the
lessons learned during this initial pilot stage and real activation learnings.

Communication
Activity 12: Common Approach to National Early Warning Messages
Leads: NDRMO and UNICEF
Partners: Ministry of Rural & Maritime Development and Disaster Management; National
Disaster Risk Management Office (NDRMO); Communication Cluster (CCE WG), UNDRR, and
World Health Organization (WHO).
25

Objective: Protect and minimise the loss of lives and livelihoods by disseminating timely and
actionable early warning messages to communities via multiple channels.
Description: Building on the existing “Get Ready Disaster Happen” multi-media campaign, this
activity will support dissemination of timely early warning messages to the public through radio,
television, social media and SMS platforms. The early warning messages (Annex 9) have been
developed in consultation with all the framework’s stakeholders and tested with the support of
WHO (Annex 10). The early warning messages are linked to the specific readiness and
activation triggers and provide sector-specific messages, including WASH, Health, Nutrition and
Protection issues, Food Security, and education. These messages include sign languge
interpretations and will be broadcasted in English, iTaukei and Hindi.. During the readiness
trigger, the messages will constantly air on radio and television platforms, through SMS blasts
and social media. The frequency of these messages on all platforms will increase once the
Action Trigger is Activated. Additionally, through the partnerships with CSO partners, volunteers
will be mobilized into communities that would fall on the potential path of the disaster to assist
in cyclone preparations. Turaga ni Koros, village leaders and advisory counsellors who would be
sensitized on AA will be engaged through digital platforms and mobilized in their respective
communities.
Challenges and potential improvements in the future:
•
•
•

Dissemination of messages through media and SMS platforms can be disrupted should
the telecommunications infrastructure be damaged by the disaster.
Community mobilization can be hindered with restricted movements in communities.
Need to revise and develop more messages with the input from each cluster/sector.

Activity 13: Local-level Early Warning Messages and Risk Communication
Leads: Fiji Red Cross Society
Description: Complementary to the national-level EWMs dissemination, Fiji Red Cross Society
will disseminate early warning messages to communities through social and mainstream
media. Fiji Red Cross will provide continuous updates and information on the status of the track
path to communities, including advice on what needs to be done and what assistance is
available to communities. Drawing on the common messages developed for the Framework
(Annex 9), Fiji Red Cross Communications team will work closely with the DM team to tailor
communication of the early warning messages appropriately to meet the differentiated needs of
community members based on the National Society’s understanding of the local context across
the operational areas. Fiji Red Cross will ensure that messages are channeled in ways that are
accessible to, and can be easily understood by, the communities they are intended to reach.
Early warning messages will be disseminated to at least 2000 people.
Continuous updates are essential to keep at-risk communities informed of any changes as the
situation evolves. Fiji Red Cross staff and volunteers will also coordinate with local leaders and
Community Disaster Committees with whom Fiji Red Cross has established relationships to
monitor the needs of different groups to ensure those most at risk are prioritised for inclusion in
all relevant activities. While management of evacuation centres is the responsibility of the Fiji
26

Government, Fiji Red Cross will work with the government to ensure communities are aware of
where these centres are located and how to access them but will not duplicate government
efforts with regard to evacuation centre management.

6.4 Community-based Anticipatory Activities
Under NDRMO leadership and within the national cluster system, a community delivery
channel complements cluster-led activities where last-mile access and short lead times
demand locally driven action. Community-based activities are cluster-aligned, NDRMOvalidated, and coordinated with Divisional and Provincial authorities. They may be financed
bilaterally or through the pooled fund, and they do not create a parallel mechanism: all
planning, implementation and reporting run through the relevant government-led clusters and
established SOPs. Communities may also undertake self-led measures, consistent with
CBDRM training, acting on public advisories and official Early-Warning Messages (EWMs) they
receive.

6.4.1 Other CSO/NGO projects (future additions)
Pursuant to the National Disaster Risk Management Act 2024—in particular Section 61 on
people-centered multi-hazard warning systems that include systems for early/timely action and
pre-agreed actions—and consistent with the Cabinet-endorsed Framework, the NDRMO may
approve additional community-based NGO/CSO anticipatory actions without revisiting Cabinet,
provided they: (i) align with the Framework’s triggers and cluster SOPs; (ii) are validated through
the national cluster system; and (iii) do not alter the Framework’s core governance, trigger logic
or scope.
6.4.2 Community self-led measures.
Communities may carry out self-led anticipatory measures consistent with CBDRM trainings
and local preparedness plans—such as tie-down of dwellings, protection of
documents/medicines, identification and outreach to high-risk households, safe evacuation
planning, and community-watch arrangements for Protection—acting on the public advisories
and official EWMs disseminated by NDRMO/FMS. Where appropriate, these actions are
coordinated with Turaga ni Koros, village leaders and advisory counsellors and reflected in
divisional situation updates.

6.5 Cross-Cutting Services
Accountability to Affected People (AAP)
Lead: NDRMO, UNICEF, Fiji Council of Social Services (FCOSS)
Accountability to affected people (AAP) is recognised as an important component of AA and will
be applied during the planning and activation of the Framework.
UNICEF, in collaboration with the Fiji Council of Social Services (FCOSS), is advancing a
pioneering approach to community engagement through the development and piloting of a
digital Community Feedback Mechanism (CFM). This initiative is designed to ensure that
communities across Fiji can share real-time feedback during emergencies using accessible
platforms such as Viber, Facebook Messenger, SMS, and in-person channels. The programme’s
27

relevance lies in its culturally appropriate and inclusive design, which addresses
communication gaps and empowers communities to actively participate in emergency
preparedness and response. The mechanism leverages FCOSS’s extensive network of District
Councils of Social Services (DCOSS), enabling decentralised implementation that respects
local customs and languages. This grassroots connectivity ensures that feedback is not only
collected efficiently but also interpreted within the cultural context of each division, enhancing
the responsiveness and relevance of humanitarian actions.
The CFM has already been piloted and endorsed by several organizations and is currently under
review by NDRMO for national-level adoption. Once endorsed, it will become a standard tool for
emergency operations, including AA activations, serving as a standardised tool for community
engagement and accountability.

Logistics
Efficient operational logistics are paramount for the success of AA in Fiji. UN Agencies in Fiji
have access to the UNCT SharePoint, a central platform for operational collaboration and
information exchange. To streamline and improve operational logistics, each UN Agency's
program and supply units have access to the Long-Term Agreements (LTAs) Directory, which is
available on the UNCT SharePoint. This directory contains comprehensive information and
instructions for effectively piggybacking existing LTAs, thereby leveraging the global UN Mutual
Recognition Agreement. It is noteworthy that all UN agencies involved in the current proposal
have endorsed a Mutual Recognition Statement. It's crucial to emphasize that OMT
Representatives and Operations Teams in all UN Agencies across the Pacific region are wellversed in the operational procedures associated with this Mutual Recognition Agreement.
Access to LTA Directory: Within the UNCT SharePoint, all UN Agencies in Fiji can access the
Long-Term Agreements (LTA) Directory. This directory serves as a valuable resource, providing
comprehensive information and instructions on how to efficiently piggyback existing LTAs. The
utilisation of this directory is instrumental in capitalising on the global UN Mutual Recognition
Agreement.
Mutual Recognition Statement: All UN agencies involved l have signed a Mutual Recognition
Statement, emphasising the commitment to cooperation and harmonisation in operational
logistics. This shared agreement fosters a collaborative and unified approach among UN
Agencies, ensuring streamlined and efficient logistics processes.
Global LTA Requests: In addition to the UNCT SharePoint, UN Agencies in Fiji have the flexibility
to request copies of global LTAs listed on the United Nations Global Marketplace (UNGM)
website. This option allows each UN Agency to directly contact the respective UN Agency
responsible for a particular LTA, ensuring timely access to essential resources.
Piggybacking Process: The well-established piggybacking process is an efficient means of
streamlining operational procurement and logistics. This process extends to various types of
LTAs, including those related to transport, NFIs, warehouse storage capacity, and more. UN
Agencies in Fiji can leverage this process to bolster their operational capabilities.

28

UN Agencies in Fiji, through their access to the UNCT SharePoint and commitment to the
Mutual Recognition Agreement, possess the necessary tools and cooperative spirit to optimize
logistics and procurement and distribution processes. Leveraging global LTAs from UNGM
further enhances their operational capabilities.

6.6 Coordination, Targeting and Information Management during activation
Coordination
Activation is coordinated in line with the AA Coordination SOP in Annex 11. Nationally, the
NDRMO chairs inter-cluster meetings; the FMS provides authoritative forecasts and impact;
line-ministry co-leads direct sector actions through the government-led clusters; and OCHA
supports with automated trigger notifications, regular facilitation of AA TWG meetings, and
consolidated updates. Sub-nationally, Divisional Commissioners convene divisional
operations, with Provincial Administrators and District Officers linking decisions to community
delivery via existing CBDRM structures and leaders. Partners implement through clusters and
report via agreed IM tools (5Ws), and the National Emergency Operations Centre (NEOC) is
placed on standby/activated as required. Meeting cadence and core information products are
specified in Annex 11.

Targeting
Geographical targeting is based on the forecast cyclone path issued every four hours by the
OCHA Centre for Humanitarian Data (example in Annex 6), informed by FMS analysis. The
trigger information email also includes vulnerability at Admin 3 from the Fiji Children’s Climate
Risk Index – Disaster Risk Model (CCRI-DRM) led by UNICEF.20 The Risk Index for Climate
Displacement (RICD), which is being developed and piloted in Fiji by IOM through its Climate
Mobility Innovation Lab, focuses on identifying displacement triggers and risk hotspots. The
RICD will be used to support and inform the targeting of AA activities once available.21 Once a
decision is made, the geographical targeting decision is recorded using the standard template.
NDRMO consolidates targeting submissions into a national view and shares updates through
inter-cluster and divisional coordination. OCHA facilitates the daily AA TWG meetings and
provides consolidated updates to NDRMO.

Information Management
Information management ensures that geographic targeting decisions and activity updates are
consistent, traceable and usable for a seamless transition from anticipatory action to response.
All partners report implementation through the 5Ws platform with an “AA” flag to distinguish
anticipatory records, capturing: who is delivering (organisation/cluster), what modality is used
(as per pre-agreed package/SOP), where activities occur (mappable admin locations/sites),
when delivery happens (window/status), and for whom (people targeted/reached with feasible
disaggregation), including brief notes on inclusion/safeguarding/AAP where relevant.
20

https://unosat-geodrr.cern.ch/apps/FJI/CCRI-DRM/

https://environmentalmigration.iom.int/sites/g/files/tmzbdl1411/files/documents/202507/iom_asiapacific_cmil_projectsheet1ricd_print_draft7-1_0.pdf
21

29

Handover/Transition to response
After landfall, the Targeting Decision Log and AA-flagged 5Ws provide the starter dataset for any
immediate response under the same clusters and, where activated, the NEOC. As part of the
Clutransition, Initial Damage Assessments (PDAs/IDAs) are initiated using national forms that
include an AA module (Annex 12), allowing teams to (i) verify impact in areas targeted ex-ante,
(ii) capture unmet needs, and (iii) document immediate outcomes of anticipatory actions.

6.6 Preparedness and Operational Readiness
Preparedness and operational readiness ensure that anticipatory actions can be delivered
within the short window between trigger and impact. NDRMO and OCHA are responsible for
overall coordination preparedness, while line ministries and humanitarian partners are
responsible for preparedness related to their respective AA activities, under the government-led
national cluster system.

Coordination (NDRMO and OCHA)
•
•
•
•

Regular coordination meetings of the Fiji Anticipatory Action Technical Working Group
(Fiji AA TWG) to maintain readiness and resolve operational bottlenecks.
A multi-stakeholder table-top exercise at the start of each cyclone season to test roles,
timelines and information flows.
In-house trainings for NDRMO staff and District Officers (DOs) to refresh SOPs and
activation procedures.
Inclusion of AA briefing sessions in NDRMO-led preparedness activities (e.g., Disaster
Awareness Week, National Emergency Response Training, briefings and related events).

Protection (MWCSP and WFP)
WFP together with MWCSP and Financial Service Providers conducted a refresher workshop
and simulation exercise in December 2024 on multi-purpose cash payout to social welfare
beneficiaries based on geographical and vulnerability targeting for a rapid cash payout.
Elements of effective communication, accountability to affected population through a
complaints and feedback mechanism and a post distribution monitoring were also part of the
refresher exercise.

WASH (UNICEF and MHMS)
UNICEF is supporting the MHMS and the national WASH coordinator on WASH cluster
coordination. Critical WASH supplies such as hygiene kits and MHM supplies, water storage
containers are prepositioned in Suva. Minimum critical WASH supplies are also prepositioned
in the warehouse of MHMS at Lautoka, Ba, Tavua and Suva and Nabouwalu.

Protection (Fiji Red Cross)
Training on Protection, Gender and Inclusion will be conducted for staff and volunteers of Fiji
Red Cross to ensure all readiness and early action activities are considerate of differentiated
needs and the most marginalised members of the community are prioritised for support
(including women, children, the elderly, people with disability).

30

GBV & SRH (MWCSP, MHMS, UNFPA)
As part of anticipatory action preparedness, UNFPA, in collaboration with the MWCSP,
conducted frontline dignity kit distributor training and simulation exercises across all four
divisions in Fiji. The two-day training sessions focused on strengthening the capacity of
government and community actors to manage prepositioned supplies, plan and execute timely
distributions, and report effectively ahead of potential crises. Participants also practiced afteraction reviews and communication documentation, including capturing beneficiary stories and
quotes, to enhance community engagement, strengthen accountability to affected people
programming, and visibility of anticipatory interventions before an emergency strikes.
To complement this effort, UNFPA organized a one-day divisional consultation and simulation
exercise with MHMS sub-divisional staff to strengthen coordination and preparedness within
the health sector. The exercise focused on identifying beneficiary selection criteria for
unconditional cash support and establishing clear data-sharing mechanisms to ensure timely
and equitable assistance once early warning triggers are activated. In parallel, UNFPA facilitated
engagement meetings with financial service providers to streamline mechanisms for the rapid
release of cash to pre-identified beneficiaries, ensuring that anticipatory actions translate into
faster, more efficient protection and support for women,girls and vulnerable groups at risk.

Education (UNICEF)
UNICEF and partners will provide refresher training to teachers and support workers on PSS
(Psychosocial Support) to ensure vulnerable children are protected, supported to continue
learning and referred for further support when necessary .

Food Security and Livelihood (FAO and Fiji Red Cross)
FAO and the FRCS conducted a simulation of the livelihood protection activities in June 202422
to test the last mile delivery of the plan. The simulation showed that building on existing
Community Disaster Committees speeds buy-in and helps embed AA in community plans,
while simulations are a practical way to test community-led targeting and rapid distribution.
Operationally, it also showed that early monitoring and pre-positioning are essential for hard-toreach coastal sites, and the intervention package (boat-protection kits and hermetic bags)
should be iterated to match user needs and regulatory requirements.

ADRA
ADRA started a 2-year AA project leading to the implementation of Early Action Protocol which
will be integrated to this Framework. The planned preparedness and operational readiness
activities include:
1. Conduct training for ADRA Fiji staff
2. Develop and share a position paper on integrating AA, with technical input from ADRA
Germany, to engage donors, corporate partners, and government stakeholders.
Logavatu, N., Liebregts, M., Temo, K., Jones, C., Jang, I., Ji, L. & Talakai, M. 2025. Simulating
anticipatory action for tropical cyclones in Fiji. FAO. Apia. ‘Simulating Anticipatory Action for Tropical
Cyclones in Fiji’.
22

31

3. Undertake a study on traditional and indigenous knowledge related to AA and early
warning systems, to inform community-level awareness and preparedness.
4. Pilot an Early Action Protocol (EAP) in a selected community, ensuring active
involvement of local authorities.
5. Test and validate the EAP through simulation exercises, integrate it into ADRA Fiji’s
emergency system, and align it with the National Emergency Management Plan (NEMP).
6. Disseminate lessons learned and best practices with regional stakeholders and ADRA
offices.
7. Advocate for EAP financing and partnerships through targeted meetings,
documentation, and donor engagement.
8. Strengthen coordination mechanisms with local and national authorities to support AA
implementation.

6.7 Community Sensitisation (Non-Alert Risk Communication)
Community sensitisation plays a critical role in ensuring that individuals and households
understand AA – what it is, how to respond when official alerts are issued , and why
government is piloting anticipatory approach to support the most ahead of storm. Building on
the recommendation from the Process Learning study, community sensitization will be led by
NDRMO and delivered with Divisional, Provincial, District, local authorities, cluster partners and
civil society, sensitisation complements—and is aligned with—the Early-Warning Messages set
out in Activity 1. The obectives of community sensitization are:
•
•

•

Building public awareness of anticipatory action;
Reinforcing practical household and community measures from CBDRM training (for
example, tying down dwellings, protecting documents and medicines, checking on highrisk households, and confirming safe evacuation plans);
Managing expectations by explaining that pre-impact assistance targets the most
vulnerable in forecast impact areas.

The approach relies on simple, accessible materials in English, iTaukei, Hindi and sign, used
both pre-season and in-season (non-alert). Delivery channels include a short community
sensitisation video (produced by UNICEF with NDRMO and the Fiji AA TWG), a one-page
awareness sheet for community leaders (Turaga ni Koros, village leaders and advisory
counsellors) disseminated via Divisional Commissioners and mainstreamed through the intercluster system, and the integration of AA into DRM policy orientations, CBDRM trainings and
Disaster Awareness Week activities (Annex 13). To complement this approach, ADRA will
conduct training for ADRA Fiji staff, church leaders, local authorities, and communities on
anticipatory action (AA), focusing on its role in disaster risk management and stakeholder
responsibilities.

32

7 The Money: Pre-Arranged Financing
The financing architecture of Anticipatory Action (AA) is fundamental to its success. It is
structured around two complementary pillars: “build” and “fuel.” The “build” component refers
to long-term investments that establish the systems, capacities, and infrastructure necessary
to enable anticipatory action. This includes strengthening early warning systems, developing
policy frameworks, training implementing partners, and pre-positioning essential supplies. In
contrast, the “fuel” component refers to pre-arranged, operational funding that is released
automatically once a pre-agreed trigger is met. This funding enables the timely implementation
of pre-defined interventions such as cash transfers, evacuation support, and protection
measures. In essence, “build” enables the system, while “fuel” powers the response—and
anticipatory financing ensures both are in place and ready when needed.

7.1 Financing Overview
Funding overview in US$ for coordinated framework
Organization

Source 1

WFP
FAO
UNICEF
UNFPA
IOM
UNW
WHO

CERF
CERF
CERF
CERF
CERF

FRCS

ADRA23
TOTAL

Simplified
early action
protocol
ADRA
Germany
Deutschland
Hilft

Amount
(US$)
948,990
274,990
774,187
200,075
200,000

Source 2
Agency financing
Agency financing
Agency financing
Agency financing

Amount
(US$)
500,000
200,000
400,000
200,000

140,232

Total
(US$)
1,448,990
474,990
1,174,187
400,075
200,000
50,000
30,000
140,232

Agency financing
Agency financing

50,000
30,000

19,500

19,500

3,937,974

7.2 Build Funding
Partners invest in the foundations that make anticipatory action work season after season:
people-centred early warning and risk communication; clear SOPs tested through simulations;
pre-positioning of NFIs and maintenance of Long-Term Agreements (LTAs) with suppliers; robust
information management (IM); supplier readiness, warehousing and surge rosters; and
community sensitisation and training of implementing partners. Examples of activities funded
through the “build” component are included in session 6.6.

The amount refers to “fuel” funding under ADRA’s project to fund and Early Action Procol activation.
These will be release when the Early Action Protocol will be finalized.
23

33

These “build” investments are the start-up and maintenance costs of a collective approach (the
build → fuel → evaluate cycle) and include enabling projects that are covered up front by
implementing agencies but are not always financed through emergency windows (including
CERF). The Fiji Red Cross’ Early Action Protocol includes funds for procurement of prepositioned stocks and readiness activities. ADRA’s AA project includes provisions for build
funding.

7.3 Pre-arranged financing: “Fuel”
Pre-arranged finance to fuel anticipatory action is critical—especially for sudden-onset
cyclones—to enable timely, effective delivery in the short pre-impact window. Financing for this
Framework is pre-arranged through multiple channels that complement one another and
operate to the same triggers, SOPs and operational plan under Government leadership. Each
channel follows its own fiduciary rules but reports into a single operational picture, ensuring
coherence, preventing double-funding and duplication, and directing resources to priority
locations.

Central Emergency Response Fund (CERF)
The Emergency Relief Coordinator agreed to pre-arrange up to $2.4 million from CERF to
support anticipatory action in Fiji. CERF will disburse funds for anticipatory action on a noregrets basis once three conditions are met:
•

Endorsement by the relevant Resident/Humanitarian Coordinator of the Anticipatory
Action framework (this document) and the CERF application package comprising an
application chapeau, agency-specific project proposals and agency-specific budgets
(in annex 7); and

•

Pre-approval by the Emergency Relief Coordinator of the Anticipatory Action framework
(this document) and the CERF application package comprising an overall strategy,
agency-specific project proposals and agency-specific budgets (in annex 7); and

•

Activation of either the readiness trigger or the action trigger within a maximum of two
years from the ERC’s pre-approval of the framework.

CERF funding is guaranteed and will be activated and disbursed as automatically as possible
immediately after the defined trigger(s) is/are reached. CERF will disburse funds on a no-regrets
basis. While a portion of the fund can be used immediately upon disbursement for readiness
activities, the remaining portion of the funding can only be used if and when an action trigger is
reached. The amount of funding for readiness vs action activities will be clearly defined in the
pre-approved project proposals and budget. The need to distinguish between these two cost
categories in advance is important given the different potential scenarios.
Pre-arrangement and/or receipt of CERF funding for anticipatory action does not preclude or
guarantee additional CERF funding for a complementary rapid response to save lives resulting
from the same or other shocks. This means that the pre-arranged funding by CERF for
anticipatory action is for the hazards and triggers outlined in this framework. Should there be
additional needs or other disasters, CERF’s other funding modalities can be requested.
Exact details on financing per agency can be found in the CERF application documents
annexed.
34

UN Agencies Co-Financing
WFP
With support from the German Federal Foreign Office, a sum of USD500,000 has been allocated
by WFP to be disbursed upon confirmation of activation triggers to co-finance the CERF
allocation intended to reach 10,000 households with multipurpose cash assistance, as well as
other readiness and activation costs. Five thousand (5000) additional households will benefit
from WFP’s co-financing. In total 15,000 households are planned to receive multipurpose
financial assistance through the Anticipatory Action pilot project
UNFPA
UNFPA is uniquely positioned to lead anticipatory and preparedness actions that safeguard the
SRH and GBV needs of women, girls, and vulnerable populations in humanitarian contexts. The
proposed USD 212,413 in AA funding will strategically complement UNFPA’s ongoing USD
200,000 disaster preparedness and response initiatives in Fiji, supported by national partners
and the Government. By leveraging both core and donor resources, UNFPA will expand the
reach and effectiveness of existing interventions, ensuring that essential SRH and GBV services
remain accessible and responsive in the face of emergencies.
UNICEF
UNICEF is strategically poised to proactively address humanitarian needs in target
communities, with a dedicated allocation of USD 400,000 from the Global Humanitarian
Thematic Funds. This funding enables UNICEF, both independently and in collaboration with its
trusted partners on the ground, to swiftly provide vital assistance to those most vulnerable in
the face of impending crises. Furthermore, UNICEF's ongoing two-year work plan in cooperation
with the GoveFrnment of Fiji demonstrates the organization's commitment to preparedness and
anticipatory action. Within this comprehensive plan, there exists a flexibility that allows for the
seamless transition of existing activities into anticipatory actions when required. This proactive
approach underscores UNICEF's dedication to ensuring the well-being and safety of
communities at risk, reinforcing its role as a steadfast humanitarian leader.
FAO
Under FAO's Anticipatory Action Window, with generous support from the German Federal
Foreign Office, a sum of USD 200,000 has been strategically allocated to Fiji. This allocation is in
reaction to the elevated probability of an above-average cyclone season in the region. The funds
will be directed towards facilitating anticipatory action activities by prepositioning and
distributing watertight drums and reinforcing fishing boats. Furthermore, this financial support
plays a pivotal role in fostering collaboration with the Fiji Red Cross, thereby streamlining the
logistical and operational procedures to expedite action in light of the trigger.

The IFRC-DREF Early Action Protocol
The Fiji Red Cross Early Action Protocol24 is financed through the International Federation of Red
Cross and Red Crescent Societies’ Disaster Response Emergency Fund (IFRC-DREF)
Anticipatory Pillar. It provides a pre-agreed envelope for pre-positioning stocks, readiness
24

https://www.anticipation-hub.org/Documents/EAPs/sEAP_Fiji_Tropical_Cyclone.pdf

35

activities (eg mobilisation, awareness raising) and early actions. Funding for early actions is only
released upon activation of the protocol when the trigger is reached. Financial management
follows FRCS/IFRC fiduciary rules.

ADRA
AA ADRA 2025 Activities are financed under the 2 year (July 2025-June 2027) CANDO 4 Project,
which includes 8 primary activities under Result 2 on CANDO 4 Project funding by ADRA
Germany Deutschland Hilft.

Government-led financing (Disaster Risk Finance and Climate Finance).
Together with the Ministry of Finance, and with facilitation support from OCHA, NDRMO will
explore how internal government resources can finance anticipatory action under this
Framework. The National Disaster Risk Management Act 2024 provides a basis through the
Disaster Risk Management Fund (Emergency Trust Fund), which can be used in line with
government rules and the Framework’s triggers, SOPs and reporting., which can be used in line
with government rules and the Framework’s triggers, SOPs and reporting.
Disaster-risk financing (DRF) instruments that are budgeted and controlled by the Government
can be used to finance and expand anticipatory action activities under the framework
parameters. These include, for example, Pacific Catastrophe Risk Insurance Company (PCRIC)
parametric insurance, the World Bank Catastrophe Deferred Drawdown Option (CAT-DDO), and
World Bank Contingency Emergency Response Components (CERCs) embedded in sector
projects. Because these DRF instruments are financed and controlled by Government—and any
payout or drawdown is received by Government—they constitute internal resources that can be
used to finance and, where appropriate, expand line-ministry-led anticipatory activities under
this Framework.
Complementary climate risk and recovery finance initiatives, such as the Global Shield may
also be explored to finance and expand line-ministry-led anticipatory activities and leverage
pre-arranged financing instruments (e.g., trigger-based financing and insurance), operating
under the same AA Framework parameters (readiness/action triggers, SOPs, coordination and
reporting).

Other Pooled/Bilateral Channels
Additional pooled or bilateral resources may be activated to complement the above and expand
anticipatory activities, provided they operate under the parameters of this Framework. To
formalize this, partners provide a short alignment note/side letter confirming adherence to the
Framework.

36

8 The Learning
Learning is an integral part of the Fiji AA Framework. It ensures that anticipatory action is
continuously improved, evidence is generated to demonstrate impact, and that national
systems are strengthened for long-term use.
During the pilot phase (2023–2025), learning was prioritised from the outset. An independent
Process Learning, conducted by the University of the South Pacific, confirmed that the
Framework generated important lessons even in the absence of its activation. These findings
directly informed the adjustments and priorities reflected in this revised version of the
Framework.
In parallel, the Fiji AA Technical Working Group supported the design of a multi-stakeholder
evaluation protocol,25 funded by FAO and developed by Johns Hopkins University with technical
support from OCHA and FAO. This protocol provides a shared methodology for assessing the
effectiveness and value for money of anticipatory actions when the Framework is activated. It
embeds an AA module into Fiji’s national Initial Damage Assessments and applies both
quantitative and qualitative methods to capture timeliness, equity, household impacts, and
return on investment across all sectors.
Learning in Phase 2 (2025–2027) will therefore follow three complementary streams:
1. Agency monitoring and evaluation – Each agency will apply its own systems to track
delivery, aligned to a harmonised set of indicators agreed through the Fiji AA TWG.
2. Collective evaluation – If activation occurs, the Johns Hopkins protocol will be applied
under NDRMO leadership to evaluate the impact of the Framework. The evaluation will
be carried out by an independent party hired by FAO with CERF funding.
3. Process learning – If no activation occurs in a season, lessons will continue to be
captured through simulations, seasonal reviews, and community feedback, ensuring
the Framework evolves even without a live trigger.
Across these streams, the Framework will prioritise answering key learning questions:
•
•
•

•
•

•

Timeliness: Did anticipatory actions reach people before impact and allow more time
for preparation?
Effectiveness and impact: Did the actions reduce humanitarian consequences on lives,
livelihoods, health, food security, education, and protection?
Targeting and equity: Did the Framework reach the most at-risk groups, including
women, children, persons with disabilities, and those in remote areas? Did joint
targeting improve efficiency and reduce duplication?
Early warning and risk communication: Were messages timely, trusted, accessible, and
did they lead to protective behaviours?
Inclusion and localisation: How were communities, sub-national authorities, and civil
society organisations engaged? Did the Framework advance localisation and
ownership?
Partnership and governance: How did government leadership and cluster-based
coordination support delivery and institutionalisation?

Johns Hopkins University (2025), Anticipatory Action Framework for Tropical Cyclones in Fiji: Multistakeholder Evaluation Protocol, https://reliefweb.int/report/fiji/anticipatory-action-framework-tropicalcyclones-fiji-multi-stakeholder-evaluation-protocol-march-2025
25

37

•

Value for money: What is the return on investment of anticipatory actions compared
with traditional response, and how can financing strategies be strengthened for
sustainability?

Learning is embedded as part of the Framework’s design, not an afterthought. Findings will be
shared with the government and partners through the Fiji and PHT AA TWG, and used to inform
government decision-making. Evaluations are explicitly designed to feed into the national policy
agenda on AA and to strengthen its integration within Fiji’s wider disaster risk management
system.
At the same time, Fiji’s experience contributes directly to the global evidence base on AA. By
demonstrating how a government-led framework can function even without activation, and by
pioneering collective evaluation methods, Fiji provides lessons of global relevance—showing
that AA is not only about faster response, but about system change. In this way, learning from
Fiji supports both the development of AA worldwide and its institutionalisation as part of Fiji’s
national disaster risk governance.

38

9 Final Provisions
Advocacy and Public Communication
Partners agree to coordinate, under the leadership of the NDRMO and the Resident Coordinator, key
messages around the framework, including during the development, activation and learning phase.
Partners’ advocacy related to projects under this Framework should always reference it.
In case of an activation of the framework, close coordination facilitated by OCHA will facilitate as a
minimum: a joint press release and mutual amplification of press released and social media stories.
To enhance common messaging and advocacy for anticipatory action, partners agree to share any
visuals (photos, videos) and impact stories with the ad hoc committee as these become available.

39

Annex 1 – Sendai GAP policy brief on GBV and SRH

40

Annex 2 – Overview of Stakeholders
Government
National Disaster Risk Management Office
(NDRMO)
Fiji Meteorological Servies (FMS)
Ministry of Health and Medical
Services (MHMS)
Ministry of Women, Children and Poverty
Alleviation (MWCPA)
Ministry of Agriculture (MoA)
Ministry of Education and Human Resource
Development (MEHRD)
Ministry of Rural & Maritime Development and
Disaster Management (MRMDDM)
Ministry of iTaukei Affairs (MTA)

Humanitarian Partners
United Nations Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA)
United Nations Office for Disaster Risk
Reduction (UNDRR)
United Nations Children's Fund (UNICEF)
United Nations Population Fund (UNFPA)
World Health Organization (WHO)
United Nations Program for Gender Equality
and Empowerment of Women (UN Women)
Food and Agriculture Organization of the
United Nations (FAO)
Fiji Red Cross Society (FRCS) &
International Federation of Red Cross and
Red Crescent Societies (IFRC)
International Organization for Migration
(IOM)
The Adventist Development and Relief
Agency (ADRA)
Fiji Council of Social Services (FCOSS)
Habitat for Humanity

41

Annex 3 – Historical Analysis
The historical storms since 2000 that would have triggered this framework as shown in the table
below. Only storms with more than 0 “Total Affected” from the EM-DAT database are shown.

Columns reference:
-

CERF: whether the storm had a CERF allocation
Pop. exposed to 64 knots: the population estimated to have been exposed to at least 64 knot
wind speeds
Pop. exp. trig.: whether the population exposure trigger condition was met
Two-day rainfall: the maximum 2-day total rainfall for the storm, averaged over the whole
country
Rain trig.: whether the rainfall trigger condition was met
Either trig.: whether either trigger condition was met (i.e. whether the framework was
triggered)
Total Affected: the total number of people affected by the storm, from the EM-DAT database

The overall trigger mechanism was developed through a simple optimization process:
1. All possible trigger thresholds for wind exposure (at 34-, 64-knot levels), and two-day rainfall
were iterated over. For each trigger combination, the historical triggers were determined.
2. Trigger combinations that did not have the correct return period (3.1 years) were rejected.
3. Trigger combinations where the forecast-based trigger did not trigger for all historical CERF
allocations (Winston 2016, Harold 2020, and Yasa 2021) were rejected.
4. Trigger combinations that were more likely to trigger with the observational trigger than with
the forecast trigger were rejected.
5. The trigger combination whose historically triggered storms caused the most total impact
(measured by “Total Affected”) was selected.

42

The accuracy metrics26 of the triggers are shown in the table below. For this table, a “positive” is a
storm with “Total Affected” of at least 22,000 people (i.e., storms at least as bad as Yasa 2021). This
subset of storms was selected on the basis that theoretically a trigger could have activated for exactly
this subset with a return period of 3.1 years (the return period specified for this framework).

26

See here for definitions: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Confusion_matrix

43

Annex 4 – Distribution Lists
Distribution list A: Official Trigger Email
Mailing list: trigger_FijiAA@pacifichumanitarian.org
To
Resident
Coordinator

NDRMO

Dirk Wagener dirk.wagener@un.org; Kesang Phuntsho kesang.phuntsho@un.org;
Fiona Schmid fiona.schmid@un.org ; Alumita Masitabua alumita.masitabua@un.org;
RCO Fiji rco.fiji@un.org
Napolioni Boseiwaqa napsboseiwaqa@gmail.com or Napolioni Boseiwaqa
napsboseiwaqa@gmail.com; Litiana Bainimarama lbainimarama@govnet.gov.fj or
lnaidoleca@gmail.com; Shaya Malini shayamalini2021@gmail.com ; National
Emergency Operations Centre neocfiji@gmail.com

Cc
Anaseini Maisema abmaisema@gmail.com ; Anaseini B. Maisema
anaseini.maisema@health.gov.fj ;
lvatuvoka@gmail.com; lvatuvoka@yahoo.com; Jese Vatukela
jese.vatukela@health.gov.fj
Ministry of Health &
Medical Services

Ministry of Women,
Children and Social
Protection
Ministry of
Agriculture
Ministry of
Education
Ministry of Rural &
Maritime
Development &
Disaster
Management

OCHA

NDRMO

UNFPA

IOM

UNICEF

WHO

Vimal Deo vimal24deo@yahoo.com or vimal.deo@health.gov.fj; Fiji WASH Cluster
fijiwashcluster@gmail.com; Toga Vosataki togavosataki@yahoo.com ;Kelera
Sakumeni kbavsaku@gmail.com;Dr Rachel Devi rachel.devi@health.gov.fj

Selai Korovusere SelaiK@mwcpa.gov.fj; Salote Biukoto salote.biukoto@mwcpa.gov.fj;
Rozia Bi rbi@mwcsp.gov.fj; Laisani Petersen laisani.petersen@unwomen.org
Titilia Wati titiliadavetanivalu3@gmail.com
Semisi Siga semisi.siga01@govnet.gov.fj; Koroiwaqa koroiwaqa1989@gmail.com

Arieta Dimuri ddsmrmd@gmail.com; Kasalia Kororua kasakororua@gmail.com; Keith
Hornby keithhornby@gmail.com;

Olga Prorovskaya prorovskaya@un.org ; Katalaine Duaibe katalaine.duaibe@un.org ;
Sara Manni sara.manni@un.org; Tristan Downing tristan.downing@un.org; Daniel
Pfister pfisterd@un.org; Yakubu Alhassan yakubu.alhassan@un.org; Daniel Gilman
gilmand@un.org; Julia Wittig wittigj@un.org; OCHA-cerf cerf@un.org ; OCHA Office
of the Pacific Islands ochafiji@un.org
Litiana Bainimarama lbainimarama@govnet.gov.fj or lnaidoleca@gmail.com;
Napolioni Boseiwaqa napsboseiwaqa@gmail.com; Prishika Nadan
prishinadan@gmail.com ; National Emergency Operations Centre neocfiji@gmail.com
Bidisha Pillai pillai@unfpa.org;Mateen Shaheen shaheen@unfpa.org ;
Rai Buenaventura buenaventura@unfpa.org;
Abdul Hussain abdhussain@unfpa.org;Olana Naigulevu naigulevu@unfpa.org;Farida
Tambun tambun@unfpa.org; Komathi govindasamy@unfpa.org
BIDDER Matthew Aaron Mark mbidder@iom.int; KANTHA Solomon skantha@iom.int;
DEVI Karishma kdevi@iom.int; RO Bangkok - Emergency and Post-Crisis Team
ROBangkokEPC@iom.int
Jonathan Veitch jveitch@unicef.org; Roshni Basu rbasu@unicef.org; Diego Fernando
Lopez dflopez@unicef.org; Ali Safarnejad asafarnejad@unicef.org; Halitesh Datt
hdatt@unicef.org; Semiti Temo stemo@unicef.org; Ronesh Prasad
roprasad@unicef.org; Kencho Namgyal knamgyal@unicef.org; Suranga De Silva
sudesilva@unicef.org; Aisling Falconer afalconer@unicef.org ; Johary
Randimbivololona jrandimbivololona@unicef.org ; Aye Aye Than athan@unicef.org ;
Diego Fernando Lopez dflopez@unicef.org; Ro Iva Namela rnamela@unicef.org
JACOBS, Mark Andrew jacobsma@who.int; GENAY-DILIAUTAS, Sophie
genaydiliautass@who.int; GILMORE, Chandra gilmorec@who.int; CASEY, Sean
scasey@who.int

44

WFP
UNWOMEN

FAO
UNDRR
IFRC

Emma Conlan emma.conlan@wfp.org; Philippe Brewster philippe.brewster@wfp.org;
Saidamon Bodamaev saidamon.bodamaev@wfp.org; Diego Flores
diego.flores@wfp.org; nitesh.chand@wfp.org
Naheed Ahme; Eri Taniguchi eri.taniguchi@unwomen.org Kolosa Matebalavu
kolosa.matebalavu@unwomen.orgLanieta Tokalauvere
lanieta.tokalauvere@unwomen.org
Qu, Guangzhou (FAOSAP) <Guangzhou.Qu@fao.org>; Talakai, Malia (FAOSAP)
<Malia.Talakai@fao.org>; Young, Joann (FAOFJ) <Joann.Young@fao.org>; Jones,
Catherine (FAORAP) <Catherine.Jones@fao.org>; Ji, Leeann (FAORAP)
<Leeann.Ji@fao.org>; Riquet, Damien (FAORAP) <Damien.Riquet@fao.org>
Gabrielle EMERY gabrielle.emery@un.org; Nazgul Borkosheva
nazgul.borkosheva@un.org
Finau Heuifanga LEVENI FINAU.LEVENI@ifrc.org; Jen STEWART
jennifer.stewart@ifrc.org; Maciu Nokelevu maciu.nokelevu@ifrc.org;
Nete Tamanitoakula nete.tamanitoakula@ifrc.org

Fiji Red Cross

Ragigia Dawai <ragigia.dawai@redcross.com.fj>; Margaret Liebregts
<margaret.liebregts@redcross.com.fj>; Unaisi Baro <unaisi.baro@redcross.com.fj> ;
Romit Maharaj romit.maharaj@redcross.com.fj ; Luta Teonea
luta.teonea@redcross.com.fj ; Luisa Turaga luisa.turaga@redcross.com.fj ;
Meresiana Moce meresiana.moce@redcross.com.fj

Australian Red
Cross

Veronica Bell vbell@redcross.org.au

ADRA

Christine Lemau christinelemau@adra.org.fj ; Angelina Taufaga
AngelinaTaufaga@adra.org.fj

Distribution list B: Complementary Trigger Information Email
Mailing list: triggerinfo_FijiAA@pacifichumanitarian.org
To
Resident
Coordinator
NDRMO

Ministry of Health &
Medical Services

Ministry of Women,
Children and Social
Protection
Ministry of
Agriculture
Ministry of
Education
Ministry of Rural &
Maritime
Development &
Disaster
Management
DSLOs
OCHA

Dirk Wagener dirk.wagener@un.org; Kesang Phuntsho kesang.phuntsho@un.org;
Fiona Schmid fiona.schmid@un.org; ; Alumita Masitabua
alumita.masitabua@un.org; RCO Fiji rco.fiji@un.org
Napolioni Boseiwaqa napsboseiwaqa@gmail.com or Napolioni Boseiwaqa
napsboseiwaqa@gmail.com; Litiana Bainimarama lbainimarama@govnet.gov.fj or
lnaidoleca@gmail.com; Shaya Malini shayamalini2021@gmail.com ; National
Emergency Operations Centre neocfiji@gmail.com
Anaseini Maisema abmaisema@gmail.com ; Anaseini B. Maisema
anaseini.maisema@health.gov.fj ;
lvatuvoka@gmail.com; lvatuvoka@yahoo.com; Jese Vatukela
jese.vatukela@health.gov.fj
Vimal Deo vimal24deo@yahoo.com or vimal.deo@health.gov.fj; Fiji WASH Cluster
fijiwashcluster@gmail.com; Toga Vosataki togavosataki@yahoo.com .Kelera
Sakumeni kbavsaku@gmail.com
Selai Korovusere SelaiK@mwcpa.gov.fj; Salote Biukoto
salote.biukoto@mwcpa.gov.fj; Rozia Bi rbi@mwcsp.gov.fj; Laisani Petersen
laisani.petersen@unwomen.org
Titilia Wati titiliadavetanivalu3@gmail.com
Semisi Siga semisi.siga01@govnet.gov.fj; Koroiwaqa koroiwaqa1989@gmail.com
Arieta Dimuri ddsmrmd@gmail.com; Kasalia Kororua kasakororua@gmail.com; Keith
Hornby keithhornby@gmail.com;

Olga Prorovskaya prorovskaya@un.org ; Katalaine Duaibe katalaine.duaibe@un.org
; Sara Manni sara.manni@un.org; Tristan Downing tristan.downing@un.org; Daniel
Pfister pfisterd@un.org; Yakubu Alhassan yakubu.alhassan@un.org; Daniel Gilman
gilmand@un.org; Julia Wittig wittigj@un.org ; OCHA Office of the Pacific Islands
ochafiji@un.org

45

NDRMO

UNFPA

IOM
UNICEF

WHO
WFP
UNWOMEN

FAO

UNDRR
IFRC

Fiji Red Cross

ADRA

Litiana Bainimarama lbainimarama@govnet.gov.fj or lnaidoleca@gmail.com;
Napolioni Boseiwaqa napsboseiwaqa@gmail.com; Prishika Nadan
prishinadan@gmail.com ; National Emergency Operations Centre
neocfiji@gmail.com
Bidisha Pillai pillai@unfpa.org;
Mateen Shaheen; shaheen@unfpa.org
Rai Buenaventura buenaventura@unfpa.org;
Abdul Hussain abdhussain@unfpa.org;
Olana Naigulevu naigulevu@unfpa.org
Farida Tambun tambun@unfpa.org
Komathi Govindasamy govindasamy@unfpa.org
BIDDER Matthew Aaron Mark mbidder@iom.int; KANTHA Solomon
skantha@iom.int; DEVI Karishma kdevi@iom.int; RO Bangkok - Emergency and
Post-Crisis Team ROBangkokEPC@iom.int
Jonathan Veitch jveitch@unicef.org; Roshni Basu rbasu@unicef.org; Diego Fernando
Lopez dflopez@unicef.org;; Halitesh Datt hdatt@unicef.org; Semiti Temo
stemo@unicef.org; Kencho Namgyal knamgyal@unicef.org; ; Aye Aye Than
athan@unicef.org; Suranga De Silva sudesilva@unicef.org; knamgyal@unicef.org;
Aisling Falconer afalconer@unicef.org; Ro Iva Namela rnamela@unicef.org
JACOBS, Mark Andrew jacobsma@who.int; GENAY-DILIAUTAS, Sophie
genaydiliautass@who.int; GILMORE, Chandra gilmorec@who.int; CASEY, Sean
scasey@who.int
Emma Conlan emma.conlan@wfp.org; Philippe Brewster philippe.brewster@wfp.org;
Saidamon Bodamaev saidamon.bodamaev@wfp.org; Diego Flores
diego.flores@wfp.org; nitesh.chand@wfp.org
Naheed Ahmed Naheed.ahmed@unwomen.org; Eri Taniguchi
eri.taniguchi@unwomen.org; Kolosa Matebalavu kolosa.matebalavu@unwomen.org
Lanieta Tokalauvere lanieta.tokalauvere@unwomen.org
Xiangjun Yao Xiangjun.Yao@fao.org ; Talakai, Malia (FAOSAP)
Malia.Talakai@fao.org; Young, Joann (FAOFJ) Joann.Young@fao.org; Vukialau
Mere Mere.Vukialau@fao.org ; Jeffrey Kich Jeffrey.Kinch@fao.org ; Jones,
Catherine (FAORAP) Catherine.Jones@fao.org; Inyoung Jang
Inyoung.Jang@fao.org; Riquet, Damien (FAORAP) Damien.Riquet@fao.org
Gabrielle EMERY gabrielle.emery@un.org; Nazgul Borkosheva
nazgul.borkosheva@un.org
Finau Heuifanga LEVENI FINAU.LEVENI@ifrc.org; Jen STEWART
jennifer.stewart@ifrc.org; Maciu Nokelevu maciu.nokelevu@ifrc.org;
Nete Tamanitoakula nete.tamanitoakula@ifrc.org
Aporosa Torotagi aporosa.torotagi@redcross.com.fj ; Unaisi Baro
unaisi.baro@redcross.com.fj ; Salote Maramaciriciri
salote.maramaciriciri@redcross.com.fj ; Kasanita Temo
kasanita.temo@redcross.com.fj ; Sainimili Lagilagi sainimili.lagilagi@redcross.com.fj ;
Livai Mocelutu livai.mocelutu@redcross.com.fj ; Salote Tupou
salote.tupou@redcross.com.fj ; Seru Tabakece seru.tabakece@redcross.com.fj ;
Mitieli Duvuloco mitieli.duvuloco@redcross.com.fj ; Sagaitu Josaia
sagaitu.josaia@redcross.com.fj
Christine Lemau christinelemau@adra.org.fj ; Angelina Taufaga
AngelinaTaufaga@adra.org.fj

46

Annex 5 – DRAFT Trigger Messages
From: data.science@humdata.org
To: trigger_FijiAA@pacifichumanitarian.org
SUBJECT: Anticipatory action Fiji – Readiness trigger reached
[readiness trigger]
This is an automated message.
Dear Resident Coordinator, dear colleagues,
The readiness trigger of the coordinated anticipatory action pilot for tropical cyclones in Fiji has been
reached in line with the 120-hour forecast shared by the Fiji Meteorological Service, operators of
Regional Specialized Meteorological Centre (RSMC) Nadi.
Readiness activities in line with the framework document [link] should now commence. CERF funding
to UN agencies is being released. OCHA may convene a meeting of the participating partners.
Best wishes and good luck,
OCHA Center for Humanitarian Data
----[action trigger]
SUBJECT: Anticipatory Action Fiji – Action trigger reached
This is an automated message.
Dear Resident Coordinator, dear colleagues,
The action trigger of the coordinated anticipatory action pilot for tropical cyclones in Fiji has been
reached in line with the 72-hour official forecast shared by the Fiji Meteorological Service, operators of
Regional Specialized Meteorological Centre (RSMC) Nadi.
All activities in line with the framework document [link] should now commence. OCHA may convene a
meeting of the participating partners.
Best wishes and good luck,
OCHA Center for Humanitarian Data
PS: Please remember that the impact of this pilot will be evaluated and we encourage all partners to
document decisions and lessons learned as best as possible during this activation. Finally, please
also ensure any visuals, stories, social media is shared with the group.

47

Annex 6 – DRAFT Trigger Information Messages
Below is a sample complementary cyclone forecast information message. The forecast in this sample was fabricated
purely for the sample and is not valid.

48

49

50

Annex 7 – Overview of Activities
UN-funded Activities
CERF Chapeau and project proposals can be accessed at cerf.un.org
Outcome

Intervention

The most
vulnerable
households are
able to meet
their essential
needs

Multi-purpose
cash

Ensure
emergency
water,
sanitation and
hygiene
supplies to
tropical
cyclone
affected
populations

Non-food
items (WASH)

Lead
Agency

Government
Counterparts

Proposed Activities

Targeted
People

WFP

Ministry of Women,
Children and Social
Protection; Ministry of
Finance

•

MPC distribution through DSW

75,000
People

•

Distribution of emergency
WASH/Hygiene kits and tarpaulins

•

Distribution of sanitary pads

•

Distribution and installation of
temporary learning centres

•

Distribution and sensitisation of
emergency learning materials

•

Mass Media messages distribution

•

SMS Blasts

•

Women with Disability Dignity Kits –
Prepositioned supplies with DPO, to
be distributed as preparedness as
soon as disaster path is defined

Ministry of Health and
Medical Services

Ensure that
children return
to safe learning
environments
and are
provided with
relevant
learning
resources to
continue their
education.

Non-food
items
(Education)

Ministry of Education

The affected
community has
access to
critical
information

Services
(Community
engagement)

NDRMO/ Ministry of
Communication

Women and
Girls, women
with disabilities
have access to
essential
hygiene items

Non-food
items
(protection)

Ministry of Women,
Children &
Poverty Alleviation

UNICEF

Pregnant
women have
access to clean
delivery kits
through health
facilities

Multipurpose
cash (Health)

Ministry of Health &
Medical Services

•

Unconditional Cash for term Highrisk pregnant women

Dignity Kit for
women &
Menstrual

Non-food
items
(protection)

Ministry of Women,
Children &
Poverty Alleviation

•

Distribution of Dignity kits usually
intended for one per women aged
(18-49) and menstrual health

20,000
People

2,700

UNFPA

People

51

hygiene kits for
Young Girls

Management kits one per young girl
aged (10-17)

Decreased
damage and
loss to crops,
tools and
fishing gears of
farmers and
fisherfolk

Non-food
items

Decreased
damage and
loss to boats of
fisherfolk

Non-food
items

Farmers and
fisherfolk are
informed that
can take locally
led actions

Services
(Early warning
messages)

NDRMO/ Ministry of
Communication/
Ministry of Agriculture
and Waterways

Non-food
items

Ministry of Rural &
Maritime
Development and
Disaster
Management

Decreased
damage and
loss to
shelters

Ministry of Agriculture
and Waterways

FAO

IOM/IFRC
Evacuation
centres
management is
boosted

Cluster
coordination

Ministry of Agriculture
and Waterways

Services
(Evacuation
centre
coordination)

Ministry of Rural &
Maritime
Development and
Disaster
Management

Services
(Gender and
Protection)

UN
Women

Ministry of Women,
Children and Social
Protection

Services
(Health)

WHO

Ministry of Health and
Medical Services

•

Distribution of watertight drums

•

Distribution of Small boat
strengthening kits

•

EWM on potential locally led
actions

•

Distribution of tie-down kits and
tarpaulins, including basic tools and
materials for minor works

2,400
People

2,760
People

•

Coordination, monitoring and support
to Evacuation Centre management
in support of NDRMO

•

Gender and protection support and
analysis

•

Deployment of DSW’s Community
Services Teams

•

Cross-cutting support to the health
cluster

Fiji Red Cross Early Action Protocol
The Fiji Red Cross Early Action Protocol can be accessed at https://www.anticipation-hub.org/download/file5011

52

Annex 8 – MoU MWCSP-MoF-WFP
MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING
BETWEEN

THE UNITED NATIONS WORLD FOOD PROGRAMME (WFP)
AND
THE GOVERNMENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF FIJI

FOR
TECHNICAL SUPPORT TO THE GOVERNMENT OF FIJI SOCIAL PROTECTION SCHEME FOR THE DELIVERY OF
ANTICIPATORY CASH TRANSFERS TO HOUSEHOLDS AFFECTED BY TROPICAL CYCLONES.

PREAMBLE
This Memorandum of Understanding (together with all Annexes hereto, this “MoU”) is entered into between the
Government of the Republic of Fiji by and through its Ministry of Finance and Ministry of Women, Children and Social
Protection (MWCSP) ( together as “Government”), and the World Food Programme of the United Nations (“WFP”),
having its headquarters in Rome, Italy, acting through its Pacific Multi-Country Office in Fiji (together with Government,
the "Parties” and each a "Party”).
WHEREAS WFP operates in Fiji under the framework of a Basic Agreement entered between the Government of the
Republic of Fiji and WFP on 21 August 2018 (the "Basic Agreement").
WHEREAS this MoU shall be read as complementary to the Basic Agreement and the provisions of the Basic Agreement
shall apply in their entirety and without exception to this MoU.
WHEREAS the Government and WFP (the “Parties”) have entered into this MoU fully accepting and agreeing to abide by
the provisions of the Convention on Privileges and Immunities of the United Nations, adopted by the United Nations
General Assembly on 13 February 1946 and the Convention on the Privileges and Immunities of the Specialized Agencies
and its Annex II, concerning the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, adopted by the United Nations
General Assembly on 21 November 1947, both of which are applicable to WFP.
WHEREAS the Government recognizes WFP’s dual mandate of: (i) saving lives in emergencies and implementing food
assistance activities to ensure access to adequate and nutritious food to the most vulnerable worldwide; and (ii) building
resilience of vulnerable populations to withstand future shocks. In the context of WFP’s Pacific Multi-Country Office,
these mandates are to be realized through strengthening the capacity of the Government of Fiji to prepare for and
respond to emergencies, especially using data to better understand and respond to the differentiated impacts of shocks
(including climatic shocks) on the food security and nutrition of those most at risk of being left behind.
WHEREAS the parties recognize the importance and value of cooperating with each other towards effective collaborative
mechanism. The Parties desire to strengthen their relationship by entering into this MoU with a purpose of providing a
coherent and structured framework for collaboration to strengthen government social protection policies, systems and
programmes to be shock responsive.

53

THEREFORE, the Parties have agreed to fully cooperate and act in consultation with each other during this cooperation
the manner and accordance with implementation procedures and responsibilities more particularly described in Annexes
1 (the “Project Document”) and 2 (the “Standard Operating Procedures” or “SOP”) for each of the technical areas.
Annexes form integral part of this MoU.
The activities described herein for this anticipatory cash transfers through national Social Protection Schemes and
technical support to the Government (the “Operation”) shall commence upon the Government's countersignature and
by return of this MoU to WFP.
ARTICLE I
PURPOSE
1.1

This MoU establishes the framework for the cooperation between WFP and the Government aimed at ensuring
that vulnerable populations have access to multi-purpose cash through anticipatory cash transfers which aim to
reduce suffering and losses and protect lives by acting ahead of the shock (the “Outcomes”). The multi-purpose
cash contributes to ensuring adequate access to food and preventing the deterioration of the nutritional status
of affected populations.

1.2

Through this MoU, WFP will provide:
a)

technical assistance for rapid cash transfers preparedness of the government social protection transfer
mechanisms;

b) funds to the Government to cover the Benefits (as defined below) for one tropical cyclone or flooding
event which may occur during the Term,
and the Government shall be responsible for:
c)

preparing and enhancing its social transfer mechanism; and

d) distributing funds provided by WFP with OCHA/CERF funding through anticipatory cash transfers (the
“Benefits”) to the persons who have been assessed as being eligible to receive Benefits and at risk of a
forecasted cyclone which selection criteria are described more particularly in Annexes (the
“Beneficiaries”) through the Government social protection platform.
ARTICLE II
TERM, AMENDMENT, TERMINATION

2.1

This MoU shall commence on the date the last of the Parties signs this MoU (the “Effective Date”) and shall
continue in full force and effect until 30 June 2027 unless terminated earlier in accordance with Articles 2.3 or
2.4 below. The term of this MoU may be extended, on the same terms and conditions set forth herein, by a
formal written agreement signed by duly authorized representative of each Party prior to the expiration of the
term.

2.2

This MoU may be supplemented or otherwise amended by a formal written agreement signed by duly authorized
representatives of each Party.

2.3

In the event of the failure by one Party to fulfil any of its obligations under this MoU, the other Party may either
(i) suspend the discharge of its own obligations by giving written notice to that effect to the defaulting Party

54

and/or (ii) terminate the MoU by providing to the defaulting Party thirty (30) days’ prior written notice.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, WFP shall have the right to terminate the MoU forthwith in accordance with
Article 2.4 and, in the event of a material breach of the provisions in Article XII. Article 12.5
2.4

WFP or Government of Fiji may terminate this MoU upon provision of ninety (90) days’ prior written notice,
without having to provide any justification therefor. Notwithstanding the foregoing, WFP may terminate this
MoU immediately by providing written notice to the Government in the event that (i) WFP’s mandate or the
resources available to WFP for the implementation of the Project is curtailed or terminated, in whole or in part,
for any reason, including, but not limited to, the non-receipt by WFP of expected funding for the Project or (ii) a
material breach of the provisions of Article XII occurs, as further described in Article 12.5.

2.5

In the event of the termination of this MoU for any reason, both Parties shall use reasonable efforts and good
faith to bring their cooperation herein to a prompt and orderly conclusion. Furthermore, upon termination of
this MoU for any reason, any balance of funds received by the Government from WFP and uncommitted as of
the date of (i) transmission of the notice of termination by the Government; or (ii) receipt by the Government of
the notice of termination by WFP, as applicable, as well as any funds not spent in accordance with the terms of
this MoU, including, without limitation, any amounts recoverable by WFP in accordance with Article XII, shall be
promptly returned to WFP.

ARTICLE III
JOINT RESPONSIBILITIES OF THE PARTIES
3.1

The Parties will cooperate proactively and constructively in all the covered areas of cooperation with respect
to:
e)

3.2

Joint work planning and identification of the potential risks and mitigation measures throughout the
process of planning and implementation of the anticipatory action framework.
f) Coordination among Parties, as well as with potential other actors that carry out relevant interventions.
g) Joint reviews of the progress, identification of bottlenecks and finding solutions to address them.
The Parties will participate in regular joint Management and Monitoring Team (MMT) meetings which will
oversee the implementation of this MoU and address any issues arising. The MMT consists of the Minister of
Women, Children and Social Protection or his/her designate and the WFP Representative and Country Director
or his/her designate. The meetings will be convened by the Government every two (2) weeks or as necessary
after the signing of the MoU.

ARTICLE IV
OBLIGATIONS OF THE GOVERNMENT
4.1

The Government:
a)

hereby designate the Ministry of Women, Children and Social Protection as the executing agency for
this Operation generally (the “Executing Agency”) and to act as the channel of communication between
the Government and WFP for the purpose of this MoU;

b) shall provide resources for the implementation of the Operation for the duration of the MoU in the
areas of its responsibilities generally, and in particular, through the Ministry of Finance, make funds
available and ready for distribution within and by the Executing Agency in a timely manner upon the
Activation Trigger Event (as defined below);

55

c)

determine the readiness and activation triggers for anticipatory cash transfers with United Nations
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (“OCHA”) and declare and communicate to others,
including WFP, when the triggers are met in accordance with the Project Plan and the “Trigger
Statement” section of the SOP (the “Readiness Trigger Event” and “Activation Trigger Event”
respectively). For the purpose hereof the Government will be represented though its National Disaster
Management Office and Fiji Meteorological Services and OCHA, through its Centre for Humanitarian
Data; and

d) shall deliver the anticipatory cash transfers to the Beneficiaries using the existing mechanisms and
financial services providers of the social protection programmes (the “FSPs”) within the agreed
timelines, in accordance with the “Project Document” (Annex 1) upon the Activation Tigger Event.
4.2

In particular, without prejudice to any other obligations set forth elsewhere in this MoU, the Government shall:
a)

Designate a Ministry of Finance Fijian Dollar bank account, approved by WFP, to deposit and maintain
the funds received from WFP earmarked as Benefits until such funds are utilized (the “Programme
Account”). The Government shall not create or permit to subsist any mortgage, lien, charge,
hypothecation, encumbrance or security interest or any other agreement or arrangement having the
effect of conferring security over the Programme Account. The Government shall be responsible for
any losses, financial or otherwise, and for ensuring that the funds provided by WFP are properly
received, accounted for and transferred to the Beneficiaries or returned to WFP, as the case may be;

b) apply the funds provided by WFP hereunder exclusively for distribution to the Beneficiaries as Benefits
and transfer fees to FSPs as indicated in Estimate Budget (as defined below) and shall take measures to
prevent the unauthorized use of funds by those persons and parties Government is responsible under
this MoU.
c)

Facilitate joint planning, supervision, monitoring and evaluation and provide overall oversight of the
activities under its responsibility as agreed upon in this MoU.

d) Capture and register complaints and feedback from Beneficiaries and third parties using its Community
Feedback Mechanisms (the “CFM”) and ensure timely response to the registered complaints and
feedback;
e)

Identify overall implementation issues, risks, and gaps likely to impact the implementation of activities
under this MoU and work towards achieving the Outcomes while mitigating identified risks to the
extent possible;

f)

Coordinate the availability of complementary interventions and quality coverage of the activities
implemented under this MoU to maximize the Outcomes;

g)

Promote the active participation of and coordination with relevant district and lower-level
decentralised authorities in the activities under this cooperation, as well as, where relevant, local
communities;

56

h) Provide suitably qualified personnel and the adequate means necessary for the implementation and
supervision of the activities under the Government's responsibility as agreed upon in this MoU;
i)

Provide its social benefits transfer framework to deliver the Benefits to the Beneficiaries, including using
and managing its FSPs and any other services required for project preparation, implementation and
management, including but not limited to, needs assessments, capacity building activities, monitoring,
and evaluation;

j)

Carry out roles and implement activities assigned to it under this MoU and such other activities as
needed to deliver upon the outputs under its responsibilities,

k)

Ensure visibility of WFP’s support through this Operation as well as that of any donor to WFP to be
communicated to the Government. This should include, at a minimum, the use of regular Government
communication channels for the implementation of its social assistance programmes;

l)

Ensure that tasks are carried out in accordance with the principles and objectives underlying the WFP
Gender Policy (Annex 7);

m) Provide anticipatory cash transfers to all targeted Beneficiaries with complete impartiality regardless
of race, religion, nationality, political opinion, or gender, and acknowledge that projects supported by
WFP do not include any activities intended to promote a specific religious or political faith or
persuasion; and
n) Carry out its obligations in accordance with humanitarian principles, including the principles of
humanitarian protection set forth in WFP Humanitarian Protection Policy (Annex 8).
4.3

Notwithstanding any other provision, the Government shall be fully responsible for its acts and omissions and
its employees. For the avoidance of doubt, all activities assigned to the Government, be it to any of its ministries,
departments, offices and services named in this MoU, shall be deemed responsibilities, acts and omission of the
Government and WFP may rely on any notice (as defined in Article XI), instructions and agreements from, by
and with any such entity as those of the Government. Unless otherwise specified in this MoU, all activities and
responsibilities of the Governments are designated to the Executing Agency. Further, activities assigned to or
implemented by the Government's contractors (such as FSPs) and other third parties on behalf of the
Government (“Government Contractors”) shall be considered activities and parties under the responsibility of
the Government. The personnel of WFP do not have the status of staff members or employees of the
Government;

ARTICLE V
OBLIGATIONS OF UNITED NATIONS WORLD FOOD PROGRAMME
Without prejudice to any other obligations set forth elsewhere in this MoU, and subject to availability of resources,
WFP shall:

5.1

Make funds available in the estimated budget set out in Annex 3 hereto (the “Estimated Budget”) but in any
event up to the maximum of USD 1,385,000 (one million, three hundred and eighty five thousand United States

57

Dollars) or its equivalent in Fiji Dollars (FJD) using prevailing the UN Operational Rate of Exchange applicable at
the time of transfer and transfer the same into the Programme Account for the purpose of providing funding to
the Government for its anticipatory cash transfer to the Beneficiaries upon the Activation Trigger Event in
accordance with Clause 7.1.
5.2

Inform the Government of any known or anticipated problems in the availability of funds; where appropriate,
assist the Government in minimizing risks resulting from such an event.

5.3

Provide suitably qualified personnel and the adequate means necessary for the implementation and technical
support of the activities under its responsibilities agreed upon in this MoU.

5.4

As applicable, cooperate with the Government and any other parties involved in the implementation of the
activities under this MoU, and coordinate, together with the Government, the activities implemented by any
parties involved in the activities under this MoU to maximise outcomes.

5.5

Provide technical assistance and guidance on anticipatory action cash transfers preparedness of the existing
social protection mechanisms, including training, where necessary, for Government staff on the planning,
development, and implementation of the anticipatory action framework designed and agreed by the
Government of Fiji, WFP, and other humanitarian partners.
ARTICLE VI
REPORTING, MONITORING EVALUATION AND AUDIT

6.1

The Government shall maintain separate and proper records and accounts of all resources provided by WFP
under this MoU including:
a) the funds earmarked as Benefits received from WFP and disbursed in accordance with the accounting
procedures and financial guidelines set out in the Project Document;
b) any funds not disbursed; and
c) any costs incurred,
in each case, in a manner that shall enable the Government to substantiate its utilization of resources in
accordance with the terms of this MoU.

6.2

The Government shall provide to WFP accurate and timely cash assistance transfer and financial reconciliation
reports and in the form set forth in Annexes 4 and 5 to be submitted within thirty (30) days after (i) completion
of the anticipatory cash transfers or (ii) the Activation Trigger Event date. The part of such reports covering the
cash transfers shall include:
a) the number of Beneficiaries to whom Benefits were disbursed, disaggregated by gender, age and
geographic location, including the value of Benefits provided to each Beneficiary; and
b) narrative information highlighting cash assistance transfers arrangements, timeliness of distribution,
any challenges and measures taken to overcome them, successes and/or recommendations related to
the implementation of the activities under this MoU.

6.3

The Government shall provide WFP with copies of all relevant records, documents, statements, and other
information as WFP may request in relation to the fulfilment by the Government of its responsibilities under this
MoU. The Government shall retain all such records, documents, statements, and other relevant information for
a period of five (5) years from the termination or expiration of this MoU. The Government shall fully cooperate
and shall ensure that its officers, employees, agents, contractors, and subcontractors fully cooperate with WFP

58

by complying with all reasonable requests from WFP to gain access to and review any such records, documents,
statements, and other relevant information.
6.3

WFP may undertake, with the cooperation of the Government and as appropriate in collaboration with other
United Nations agencies, including OCHA, evaluation, management, or technical review missions in order to
assist in monitoring the progress of the Operation. The Government shall afford authorized representatives and
agents of WFP the opportunity at all reasonable times to make field visits related to the activities undertaken by
the Government hereunder. The Government shall ensure that its officers, employees, agents, contractors, and
sub-contractors fully cooperate with the execution of any evaluation of the Operation conducted by or on behalf
of WFP.

6.4

Subject to WFP’s internal rules and regulations, WFP and the Government may jointly undertake, as necessary,
the preparation of baseline data, assessment and monitoring as well as evaluation reports concerning areas
where the Government operates under this MoU. Notwithstanding the foregoing, WFP may, in its sole discretion
and subject to its internal rules, provide the Government with baseline data, assessment and monitoring as well
as evaluation reports concerning areas where the Government operates under this MoU.
ARTICLE VII
PAYMENTS

7.1

Following the satisfaction of the following conditions precedent, WFP shall transfer the funds, in a single
instalment, in the amount stated in Article 5.1 in accordance with the timeline set out in the SOP:
a) the Effective Date has occurred;
b) the Government has delivered original copy of the MoU signed by it to WFP;
c) The Activation Trigger Event has been declared and communicated, in accordance with Article 4.1(c).

7.2

All disbursements of funds from WFP to the Government shall be made in the Fijian Dollars specified in the
Estimated Budget into the Programme Account, detailed of which are as follows:
Account Name: Government Central Account
Bank Name: Reserve Bank of Fiji
Bank Address: Pratt Street, Suva
Account Number: 31501
Swift Code: RBFJFJF

7.3

The Government shall proceed to disburse the anticipatory cash transfers to the targeted Beneficiaries following
the Activation Trigger Event within the timeline specified in the SOP. The Government’s obligation hereunder is
notwithstanding whether WFP’s funds have been credited to the Programme Account.

7.4

No later than sixty (60) days following the transfers of Benefits to Beneficiaries are made or the Activation Tigger
Event, the Government shall refund to WFP in the same currency as it has received from WFP any and all
undistributed Benefits and associated withdrawal fees, as well as any other unused funds provided by WFP under
this MoU. The Government shall, as necessary, put in place adequate contractual requirements with other
relevant parties to ensure satisfaction of this obligation.

7.5

Without prejudice to article 7.4, immediately upon the expiration, termination or suspension of this MoU, and
in any event, no later than thirty (30) days following the occurrence of any such event, the Government shall

59

return to WFP any portion of payment received from WFP hereunder not spent or spent but not in accordance
with the terms of this MoU, including, without limitation, any amounts recoverable by WFP in accordance with
Article XIII. The Government shall refund in the same currency as it has received from WFP.
7.6

The Government acknowledges and agrees that all payments hereunder are financed with the resources of
donor governments or organizations and that, notwithstanding any other provision of this MoU, WFP’s financial
commitments, including its payment obligations, under this MoU shall not exceed the amounts specified in the
Estimated Budget and is subject to WFP having received funds from such donors and organisations for the
purpose of this Operation.

7.7

In the event that WFP is unable to, as a result of the unavailability of funds, provide the Government with
resources in the full amount specified in this MoU, WFP shall provide written notice of such event to the
Government without undue delay.

7.8

Any payments to WFP from the Government hereunder shall be made into the WFP bank account with the
following specifications:
Account Name:
Account Type:
Bank Name:
Branch Name:
Account Number:
Swift Code:

WORLD FOOD PROGRAMME FIJI IMPREST FJD
Business Cheque Account
WESTPAC BANK
WESTPAC Suva, 1 Thompson Street Suva
9808124573
WPACFJFX

ARTICLE VIII
LIABILITY AND INDEMNIFICATION
8.1

The Parties shall work together to prevent any losses associated with the activities envisaged in this MoU. The
Government shall make good any loss directly attributable to the Government (including to the Government
Contractors), including any losses incurred under Article XIII, and shall reimburse such losses to WFP, whether
in kind or in the equivalent monetary value prevailing at the time of the loss, in either case, as WFP shall be
entitled to select in its sole discretion.

8.2

The Government shall be responsible for dealing with all claims in Fiji arising from or directly attributable to the
activities under this MoU, or any other supplemental agreement, that may be brought by third parties against
WFP, its officers, employees, agents, contractors and sub-contractors and shall pay compensation in accordance
with its national law, in respect of such claims and shall indemnify and hold harmless WFP, its officers,
employees, agents, contractors and sub-contractors, except where the Parties agree that the particular claim or
liability was caused by gross negligence or willful misconduct on the part of WFP.

8.3

Without prejudice to Article 8.1 and 8.2, the Government shall assume full legal responsibility for the
safekeeping, handling and management of the funds provided to it by WFP under this MoU, whether such funds
are held by the Government or any Government Contractor. The Government shall assume sole liability for any
losses occurring at any stage from the time at which funds are deposited by WFP into the Programme Account
until such time as such funds are disbursed to the Beneficiaries in accordance with the terms of this MoU,
including any losses resulting from any breach of any provision in this MoU, as well as any acts, omissions or
negligence attributable to the Government, its officials, employees, agents, contractors and sub-contractors.

60

The Government shall be responsible for reimbursing any loss to WFP subject to WFP’s request. For the purpose
hereof, the funds are deemed disbursed to the Beneficiaries, upon crediting of Benefits to Beneficiaries’ own
accounts for cash transfer using mobile money wallets and bank accounts, and actual receipt of Benefits in cash
by the relevant beneficiaries for cash transfer using the postal service.
8.4

WFP shall not assume responsibility or liability for any loss or damage, including any indirect or consequential
loss or damage, arising out of this MoU or any agreement entered pursuant hereto unless such loss or damage
is attributable to gross negligence or willful misconduct on the part of WFP.

ARTICLE IX
COMMUNICATIONS, CONFIDENTIALITY AND DATA PROTECTION
9.1

WFP may provide its donors as well as other third parties as required under its internal rules and regulations
with relevant information relating to this MoU, its contents and its implementation, as well as copies of reports
and financial statements received from the Government hereunder.

9.2

In all other cases, the Parties shall communicate each other’s role to the general public as agreed in each case
by the Parties. This may include, without limitation, the display by the Government of WFP visibility and/or
communication materials as requested by WFP from time to time.

9.3

Notwithstanding Article 9.2, neither Party shall make or issue any public statements, press releases, or
communications regarding the collaboration of the Parties or any of the activities governed by this MoU without
consultation with, and the prior written consent of, the other Party, as regards the contents of such public
statement, press release or communication.

9.4

Without prejudice to WFP’s right under Article 9.1, each Party shall maintain the confidentiality of any nonpublic information pertaining to or provided by the other Party hereunder, including information relating to any
activities governed by this Mou. Each Party shall use such information only for purposes of this MoU and not for
any commercial or private advantage. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the Government may disclose select
information to contractors solely to the extent necessary for the purposes of the implementation of the activities
envisaged under this MoU and the distribution of the Benefits, provided that such contractors are subject to a
duty of confidentiality no less restrictive than those referred to in this Article 9.4. These obligations shall survive
any suspension, termination or expiration of this MoU.

9.5

The Parties shall ensure that any personal data of Beneficiaries of the Project will be processed in accordance
with the Data Processing Conditions set out in Annex 6.
ARTICLE X
FORCE MAJEURE

61

10.1

The term force majeure as employed herein shall mean any unforeseen event beyond the control of the Parties,
which makes the performance of obligations under this MoU impossible in whole or in part, and which
reasonably justifies the suspension or termination of this MoU, in whole or in part.

10.2

Neither Party shall be considered to be in breach of this MoU to the extent that performance of an obligation
under it is prevented by a force majeure event, which shall be notified to the other Party no later than fourteen
(14) days from the date of the beginning of the occurrence of such event. The Party to which notice of the force
majeure event has been provided shall be relieved of the corresponding reciprocal obligations, it being
understood by the Parties that the existence and/or applicability of the claimed force majeure event may be
disputed under the procedure set forth in Article XV hereof. For the avoidance of doubt, occurrence of a tropical
cyclone, is not a force majeure event.

ARTICLE XI
NOTICES
11.1

Unless otherwise agreed, any correspondence, notification, report, request or other communication (each a
“notice”) to be provided by one Party to the other in connection with this MoU shall be made in writing. Any
notice required to be given herein shall be deemed to have been provided if served by personal delivery, courier,
recorded delivery, registered post, facsimile or e-mail, at the address, e-mail address or facsimile number of the
focal point of the recipient Party, as applicable, as specified in Article 11.2.

11.2

The focal point for each Party for purposes of this MoU shall be as set forth below. Any changes in connection
with the focal point designation of either Party shall be promptly notified to the other Party no later than three
(3) days following the date on which such change shall have occurred.
For the Government
Name: Eseta Nadakuitavuki
Title: Permanent Secretary
Address: Civic Tower, Level 5, Victoria Parade
Suva
E-mail: eseta.nadakuitavuki@mwcsp.gov.fj

For WFP
Name: Emma Conlan
Title: Deputy Country Director and
Representative
Address: WFP Pacific, Level 2, Ra Marama
House, Gordon Street, Suva, Fiji
E-mail address: emma.conlan@wfp.org

ARTICLE XII
ANTI-FRAUD AND ANTI-CORRUPTION
12.1

Each Party hereby affirms that it is highly risk averse towards fraud; corruption; theft; collusive, coercive and
obstructive practices; money laundering; and financing of terrorism as such terms are defined in WFP’s Anti-

62

Fraud and Anti-Corruption Policy (collectively, the “Prohibited Practices”) in its activities and operations and has
zero tolerance for inaction. Each Party has the duty to act honestly and with integrity in the course of
implementation of this MoU. It is understood that the Government agrees to maintain standards of conduct
governing the performance of its officers, employees, contractors, sub-contractors, agents and affiliates,
including the prohibition of Prohibited Practices in connection with the granting and administration of any
resources provided pursuant to this MoU.
12.2

The Government affirms its knowledge and acceptance of the general principles and objectives underlying WFP’s
Anti-Fraud and Anti-Corruption Policy, as amended from time to time and undertakes to communicate such
principles to its officers, employees, contractors and sub-contractors, agents and affiliates and shall take all
reasonable measures to ensure that such persons or entities do not engage in Prohibited Practices. The
Government shall include appropriate anti-fraud and anti-corruption provisions in any sub-contract or subagreement entered into by the Government pursuant to this MoU.

12.3

The Government will act on all reasonably suspected cases of any Prohibited Practice. In particular, it shall
promptly disclose to WFP any reasonably suspected Prohibited Practice or any attempt thereof.

12.4

WFP shall have the right to conduct its own investigation of any reasonably suspected Prohibited Practice. In
such event, the Government shall fully cooperate with WFP or its agents and shall take all necessary measures
to ensure that its officers, employees, agents and affiliates, contractors and sub-contractors fully cooperate with
any such investigation conducted by WFP or its agents, including by providing WFP or its agents all relevant
information, records, documentation and premises.

12.5

The Parties hereby expressly acknowledge and agree that in the event that the Parties were to determine,
through an investigation conducted in accordance with Article 12.3, Article 12.4 or otherwise, that a Prohibited
Practice has occurred, such event shall constitute a material breach of this Article XII. In all such cases, WFP shall
be entitled to immediately terminate this MoU in accordance with Article 2.4 and recover all losses, financial or
otherwise, suffered by WFP in connection with such Prohibited Practice, including by withholding relevant
amounts from any subsequent disbursements, and take any other actions in accordance with WFP internal rules
and regulations as may be deemed necessary or appropriate.
ARTICLE XIII
ANTI-TERRORISM

13.1.

Consistent with numerous United Nations Security Council resolutions relating to terrorism and in particular, the
financing of terrorism, WFP and the Government shall seek to ensure that none of the resources received under
this MoU, whether in cash or in kind, is used, directly or indirectly, to provide support to terrorist entities or
individuals.

13.2.

In accordance with this policy, the Government agrees to employ all reasonable efforts to ensure that none of
such resources (a) is knowingly transferred directly or indirectly or otherwise used to provide support to any
individual or entity associated with terrorism as designated on the list maintained by the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to Security Council Resolution 1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011) (available at
http://www.un.org/Docs/sc/committees/1267/1267ListEng.htm or any other similar lists that may be
established by the United Nations Security Council, including the list of individuals and entities maintained by
the Security Council Committee established pursuant to resolutions 751 (1992) and 1907 (2009) concerning
Somalia and Eritrea; and/or (b) is used in any other manner that is prohibited by a resolution of the United
Nations Security Council adopted under Chapter VII of the Charter of the United Nations.

63

ARTICLE XIV
PREVENTION OF SEXUAL EXPLOITATION AND ABUSE
14.1

The United Nations and WFP are committed to the protection of vulnerable populations in humanitarian crises,
including from sexual exploitation and abuse. By entering into an MoU with WFP, the Government undertakes
to adhere to: (i) the standards set out in the Secretary-General’s Bulletin Special measures for protection from
sexual exploitation and sexual abuse (ST/SGB/2003/13); (ii) any minimum operating standards adopted as a
result of the Statement of Commitment on Eliminating Sexual Abuse and Abuse by UN and Non-UN Personnel
of 4 December 2006; and (iii) any other Protection from Sexual Exploitation and Abuse (PSEA) policy or guidelines
as may be adopted by WFP, as notified to the Government by WFP from time to time.

14.2.

The Government shall ensure that its personnel, agents, contractors and subcontractors conform to the highest
standards of moral and ethical conduct. Any failure by the Government to take preventive measures against
sexual exploitation or abuse, to investigate allegations thereof or to take corrective action, shall constitute
grounds for termination of the MoU.
ARTICLE XV
PRIVILEGES AND IMMUNITIES

15.1.

Nothing in this MoU or any agreement and/or document entered into in connection with this MoU shall (i) imply
a waiver, express or implied, by WFP, the United Nations and the Food and Agriculture Organization of the
United Nations of any privileges or immunities enjoyed by them pursuant to the 1946 Convention on the
Privileges and Immunities of the United Nations, the 1947 Convention on the Privileges and Immunities of the
Specialized Agencies, customary international law, other relevant international or national agreements, or under
domestic law or (ii) confer any such privileges or immunities on the Government or any of its officers, employees,
agents, contractors or sub-contractors.
ARTICLE XVI
SUBCONTRACTING; PROCUREMENT

16.1

In the event that the procurement of goods and/or services are required to be made by the Government
pursuant to this MoU, all necessary procurement actions to be taken in connection therewith shall be carried
out in accordance with the Government’s applicable procurement policies and procedures and in a manner
consistent with internationally accepted procurement standards.

16.2

In the event that the Government requires the services of contractors or sub-contractors to perform any
obligations under this MoU, the Government shall obtain written approval from WFP prior to entering into any
sub-contracts or sub-agreements. WFP shall be entitled, in its sole discretion, to review and approve, where
appropriate, the qualifications of any prospective contractor or sub-contractor for purposes of this MoU.

16.3

The terms and conditions of any sub-contract or sub-agreement entered into by the Government pursuant to
this MoU shall be fully consistent with the terms and conditions of this MoU. The Government shall ensure that
provisions analogous to those contained in this MoU, including, without limitation, the provisions of Articles VI,
IX, XII and XIII hereof, are included in any such sub-contract or sub-agreement.
ARTICLE XVII
APPLICABLE LAW AND SETTLEMENT OF DISPUTES

64

17.1.

The interpretation, construction and performance of this MoU, including any agreements and/or documents
entered into in connection with this MoU, and any claims, controversies or disputes arising hereunder or there
under shall be exclusively governed by general principles of international commercial law and the terms and
conditions of this MoU, to the exclusion of national law.

17.2.

Any claims, controversies or disputes between the Parties arising out of or relating to this MoU or under any
agreements and/pr documents entered into in connection with this MoU, shall be settled in accordance with
the provisions of the Basic Agreement.
ARTICLE XVIII
OTHER PROVISIONS

18.1

The Parties shall carry out all their respective responsibilities in relation to this MoU in a proper, faithful, diligent,
timely, efficient and professional manner.

18.2

The Parties are committed to ensuring that their personnel and the personnel of any third parties appointed in
the framework of the activities contemplated under this MoU adhere to their respective codes of conduct and/or
to other internationally accepted principles of accountability.

18.3

The collaboration between the Parties envisaged hereunder is non-exclusive and shall not preclude either Party
from engaging in, or collaborating with third parties on, other activities such as those covered in this MoU.

18.4

This MoU shall not constitute a legal partnership, representation, alliance, joint venture, association or company
of any sort between WFP and the Government or any other person, and shall not impose any obligations and/or
responsibilities on the Parties except such obligations and responsibilities as are expressly stipulated herein.

18.5

Nothing contained in or relating to this MoU shall be construed as creating or establishing between the Parties
the relationship of employer and employee or of principal and agent. The officers, employees, agents,
representatives, contractors or sub-contractors of each of the Parties shall not be considered in any respect as
being the employees or agents of the other Party.

18.6

This MoU comprises the main body of this MoU as well as all the Annexes attached hereto, which together
constitute the entire agreement between the Parties in respect of the Project. Each of the documents
comprising this MoU is an essential part of the agreement between the Parties, and a requirement occurring in
one is as binding as though occurring in all. The documents comprising this MoU are intended to be
complementary to each other and to describe and provide for a complete agreement. In the event of any conflict
among the documents comprising this MoU, the order of precedence shall be as set forth below.

18.7

(a)

the main body of this MoU;

(b)

the Project Document (Annex 1);

(c)

the Plan of Operations and Standard Operating Procedures (Annex 2)

(c)

the Estimated Budget (Annex 3); and

(d)

all other Annexes.

Each provision under this MoU is severable and distinct. In the event that any provision in this MoU is held to be
invalid, illegal or unenforceable, such invalidity, illegality or unenforceability shall not affect the validity, legality
and enforceability of any other provision in this MoU.

65

18.8

Any provision of this MoU, including, without limitation, the provisions of Articles VI, IX, XV and XVII, which
contemplate performance or observance subsequent to any suspension, termination or expiration of this MoU
shall survive any suspension, termination or expiration of this MoU and shall continue in full force and effect.

IN WITNESS WHEREOF the undersigned, being duly appointed representatives of the Parties, have on behalf of the Parties
signed this MoU as confirmation of the terms and conditions contained herein.
Signed at Suva, Fiji on ……………………………. 2026

For the Government:

For WFP:

MINISTRY OF FINANCE
Name: …………………………………...........

Name:………………………………….............

Designation: …………………………..........

Designation: ………………………...............

Signature: ……………………………...........

Signature: ……………………………..............

MINISTRY OF WOMEN, CHILDREN

66

AND SOCIAL PROTECTION
Name: …………………………………...........

Designation: …………………………..........

Signature: ……………………………...........

67

ANNEX 1:
Project Document

WFP TECHNICAL SUPPORT ON ANTICIPATORY CASH TRANSFERS USING THE GOVERNMENT OF FIJI SOCIAL
PROTECTION SCHEME DELIVERY MECHANISM

A CERF funded Anticipatory Action project with technical support from the United Nations World
Food Programme

December 2025

68

69

Table of Contents
List of abbreviations .......................................................................................................................................... 71
Background ........................................................................................................................................................ 72
Project Summary ............................................................................................................................................... 72
Life-Saving Justification ..................................................................................................................................... 73
Objectives and Expected Outcome ................................................................................................................... 73
Implementation arrangements ......................................................................................................................... 73
Project Activities ................................................................................................................................................ 74
Anticipatory cash transfers............................................................................................................................ 74
Flow of funds ............................................................................................................................................. 74
Transfer value ............................................................................................................................................ 74
Cash assurance .............................................................................................................................................. 74
Geographical targeting and beneficiary selection......................................................................................... 75
Capacity strengthening.................................................................................................................................. 75
Communication with communities ............................................................................................................... 75
Emergency preparedness and system strengthening ................................................................................... 75
Monitoring and learning................................................................................................................................ 75
Partnerships and coordination ...................................................................................................................... 76
Roles and Responsibilities ................................................................................................................................. 76
National Disaster Management Office .......................................................................................................... 76
Ministry of Finance ........................................................................................................................................ 76
Ministry of Women, Children and Social Protection ..................................................................................... 76
United Nations World Food Programme....................................................................................................... 77
Cross Cutting Issues ........................................................................................................................................... 77
Accountability to Affected Populations......................................................................................................... 77
Gender ........................................................................................................................................................... 77
Gender-based violence.................................................................................................................................. 77
Disability Inclusion ......................................................................................................................................... 77
Project Timeframe ............................................................................................................................................. 78
Operational Presence and Access ..................................................................................................................... 79

70

List of abbreviations
AA

Anticipatory Action

AAR

After-action-review

BNPL

Basic Needs Poverty Line

CERF

United Nations Central Emergency Response Fund

CFM

Community Feedback Mechanisms

DRR

Disaster Risk Reduction

DSW

Department of Social Welfare, MWCSP

FAO

Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations

FCWG

Fiji Cash Working Group

FJD

Fijian Dollars

FMS

Fiji Meteorological Services

G2P

Government-to-Person

MWCSP

Ministry of Women, Children and Social Protection

OCHA

Office for Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs

NDMO

National Disaster Management Office

FMS

Fiji Meteorological Services

PAAW

Pacific Anticipatory Action Week

SMS

Short Message Service

UN

United Nations

UNFPA

United Nations Population Fund

UNICEF

United Nations Children’s Fund

WFP

United Nations World Food Programme

71

Background
Tropical cyclones have disproportional impacts on small island states like Fiji. In its National Adaptation Plan, Fiji underscored its
vulnerability to tropical cyclones which due to climate change are expected to increase in intensity. However, thanks to the
advances in forecasting and early warning systems, the likelihood, intensity and impacts of tropical cyclones have become
increasingly predictable. Following lessons learned and recommendations from the Tropical Cyclone Winston response in 2016,
the Government of Fiji has been committed to the development of shock responsive social protection policies, systems and
programmes, through review of existing and development of new disaster management policies. With assistance from the World
Bank, the Government is in the process of developing an adaptive social protection policy that will guide the implementation of
shock responsive social protection initiatives.
Over the past years, the global humanitarian community has developed a concept of Anticipatory Action (AA) 27 that builds on
existing Disaster Risk Reduction (DRR) frameworks to enable actions and financing to be triggered based on forecast of impending
climate-induced shocks rather than reacting to their impact. There is growing evidence that providing assistance prior to the onset
of a predictable shock is lifesaving, dignified and more cost-effective than reacting to loss and damages post shock. In addition, an
anticipatory approach can also protect development gains. There are three key building blocks of AA: (i) forecasting, (ii) pre-agreed
actions and (iii) pre-arranged financing. It is important that governments and its partners agree on thresholds, triggers, actions,
and financing modalities to ensure that AAs are timely, effective and reduce vulnerabilities of the affected population. This
agreement – outlined in the Anticipatory Action Plan – forms the basis of commitments to fund disbursement from OCHA/CERF
to WFP and the Government of Fiji and is reflected below in the flow of funds.
The Pacific Anticipatory Action Week (PAAW) (28 to 30 March 2023) brought together 15 governments represented by National
Disaster Management Office of Fiji (NDMO), Fiji Meteorological Services (FMS) and partners to advance AA in the Pacific. During
this meeting, the Government of Fiji and operational partners showed great interest to pilot a collective AA framework for tropical
cyclones. Following the PAAW, the United Nations (UN) Resident Coordinator in May 2023 requested the Under-Secretary-General
for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency Relief Coordinator to provide support for piloting AA in Fiji. OCHA confirmed this support,
including pre-arranged financing from the United Nations Central Emergency Response Fund (CERF) of up to US$1 million should
pre-agreed triggers for tropical cyclones be met for the first two years 2023-2025. The pilot was reviewed and has now been
agreed to be extended for another two years 2025-2027.
The establishment of a pilot AA framework for tropical cyclones in Fiji takes place within a broader effort for disaster risk
management, including the United Nations Secretary-General’s Early Warning for All Initiative for which Fiji is a priority country.
Efforts will also be undertaken to include especially vulnerable communities in the design of the framework. In addition to ensuring
adequate access to food and preventing the deterioration of the nutritional status of affected populations through anticipatory
cash transfers, the purpose of this pilot is to test AA viability in the Pacific Region with the aim of establishing it as a regular
operational approach for social protection assistance in shock-prone states and islands in the region.

Project Summary
The Government, in partnership with WFP, will support at-risk communities by vertically expanding social protection benefits with
unconditional anticipatory cash transfers as a measure to help people to mitigate the impact of tropical cyclones. To ensure fast
and efficient assistance before the tropical cyclone strikes, the cash transfers will use Government’s existing social protection
programmes payment systems and reinforce national and local capacities to prepare for, respond to and withstand future shocks
through social protection systems. In consultation with the Government, its existing transfer mechanisms that include mobile
money, bank transfers and post office cash vouchers will be assessed to identify any assurance risks and potential challenges for
rapid cash transfers to the right people with the right amount, and to the extent possible, risk mitigation measures will be put in
place to ensure preparedness and assurance of these instruments.
With funding from CERF, the Government and WFP will support existing Department of Social Welfare (DSW) beneficiaries of the
Government’s national social protection programmes, as more particularly described under the section headed “Project Activities”
(Beneficiaries) through AA cash transfers. Beneficiaries will receive an unconditional and unrestricted cash assistance before
cyclones hit to ensure that their immediate food and other essential needs can be met in local markets and emergency
27

Anticipatory Action (AA) refers to actions triggered before a crisis to mitigate the worst effects of the crisis, or even avoid crisis altogether. It is a rapidly
growing concept used in humanitarian aid, climate change and disaster, and climate finance.

72

preparedness actions such as evacuation, and reinforcement of their dwellings before the tropical cyclone strikes.

Life-Saving Justification
The proposed anticipatory cash transfers will save lives by helping people to prepare for and mitigate the impact of tropical
cyclones. The anticipatory cash transfer will also support the long-term recovery of the affected populations by stabilizing their
livelihoods, preventing them from turning to negative coping strategies such as selling of productive assets, and by stimulating
local markets and economies.
The proposed anticipatory cash transfers fall within the life-saving mandate of the CERF as follows:
a) The anticipatory cash transfers helps to meet immediate food security needs and other essential needs at the onset of
tropical cyclones, such as covering costs of evacuation or reinforcement of recipients’ dwelling.
b) The anticipatory cash transfers will be provided in a manner that is consistent with humanitarian principles of humanity,
neutrality, impartiality, and independence.
Cash will be transferred to people at risk of the tropical cyclones at confirmation of activations triggers and before the forecasted
landfall. The Government of Fiji and WFP recognise the potential that a forecasted storm landfall might not actually occur – as
weather-related hazards can never be predicted with full certainty. However, given the low likelihood of this due to predictability
of the hazards to be addressed and the high impact on lives and livelihoods – this recognised risk is considered to be mitigated by
sound Anticipatory Action Plan design and the prioritisation of life saving assistance.

Objectives and Expected Outcome
The primary objective of the project is to achieve food security outcomes and emergency preparedness for the forecasted affected
population. The proposed approach also supports the national Government's leadership and commitment in anticipating the
emergency, as well as the national social protection systems to become more shock responsive, and while also strengthening
existing Government social protection programme.
In view of Fiji's resilient markets, and the existence of effective nationwide social protection schemes, WFP's food security
intervention through this Project, by supporting the Government in its anticipatory cash transfers, as the best approach to achieve
national objectives and in so doing:
(i)
address the immediate food and other essential needs of some of the poorest and most vulnerable members of
society;
(ii)
limit their adoption of negative coping strategies such as selling of productive assets;
(iii)
enable them to purchase food of their choice locally, and in so doing, help strengthen local markets;
(iv)
prepare for the cyclone by evacuating from their house to evacuation center, moving their livestock to safer
place, or reinforcing their dwellings.
(v)
strengthen the Government’s emergency response capacity and national social protection systems; and
(vi)
generate evidence to inform future AA in Fiji and the Pacific region.

Implementation arrangements
Through the DSW under the Ministry of Women, Children and Social Protection (MWCSP), the Government will provide leadership
for the development and implementation of the Project and shall be responsible for ensuring that the funds provided by WFP are
properly received, transferred to beneficiaries in timely manner, and thoroughly accounted for. The Government’s responsibility
for the Project will include the provision of suitably qualified personnel and the adequate means necessary for the implementation
and supervision of the activities under the Government’s responsibility throughout the project. The government social protection
programme payment system to be used for the transfer of WFP funds shall continue to be managed by the Government.
WFP, through its Pacific Office, Regional Bureau for Asia and the Pacific and Headquarters, will leverage its human resources and
technical expertise in social protection, cash-based transfers, and research, assessment and monitoring to ensure provision of
quality advisory to the Government for the Project. WFP will provide support for optimization of processes and functions for the
same payment systems to ensure assurance and readiness for anticipatory cash transfers during the upcoming cyclone season.
Furthermore, WFP will provide technical, analytical, and capacity strengthening support to the development of PDM tools, data
collection and reporting. The Post Distribution Monitoring (PDM) will be complemented by an after-action review (AAR) session
that will be conducted by the Government of Fiji and WFP in collaboration with the DSW, NDMO, other relevant departments of
the Government, humanitarian and development partners, and beneficiary communities. The AAR will seek to review the overall

73

AA process and identify best practices and areas of improvement to make recommendations for improvements in the design of
future AA in Fiji and the Pacific region.

Project Activities
Anticipatory cash transfers
The Government of Fiji, in partnership with WFP, will support a projected 15,000 households (75,000 people) with anticipatory
cash transfers. With CERF funding, WFP will provide funds to the Government so that the Government will, through its social
protection programme payment system, provide cash assistance to the existing beneficiaries of social protection schemes
identified by the Government under four parts of the national social protection scheme namely: 1) the Poverty Benefit Scheme,
2) the Care and Protection Allowance, 3) the Disability Allowance and 4) the Social Pension Scheme. The government in
consultation with WFP proposed transfer value of FJD200 28 to be provided to targeted households. Confirmation of the transfer
value will be carried out in consultation with the Fiji Cash Working Group (FCWG) and the Department of Social Welfare (DSW).
Flow of funds
WFP will receive CERF funds from OCHA immediately after the activation of preparedness triggers, set out in the Plan of Operation
(annex 2). Below is the process flow for each of the transfer modalities:
1) OCHA communicates to WFP that a trigger has been reached, which immediately activates the transfer of funds from OCHA
to WFP – and subsequently from WFP to the Government of Fiji. OCHA will transfer the funds as per the agreement set out
in the Anticipatory Action Plan, which details triggers agreed by all parties.
2) Upon internal approval processes with the Government that should take place within 24 hours, DSW will disburse the funds
to the accounts of the Government Payment Agents together with a beneficiary list and their payment details
3) WFP will transfer funds from its Imprest account to the Government’s Programme Account to cover for the transfer value,
including the relevant withdrawal fee amount, within 24 hours after receiving the request from the Government.
4) Once the funds have been transferred, WFP will share a transfer notification with DSW to notify them of the transaction,
within 24 hours of processing the transfer to DSW.
5) Upon confirmation of receipt of funds, DSW will issue an acknowledgement letter and a receipt to WFP.
Transfer value
Targeted households will receive a one-off, unconditional, and multi-purpose cash of FJD200 to support their households purchase
items for their essential needs and necessary services before the shock. In the absence of an established minimum expenditure
basket (MEB)29 in Fiji, the proposed transfer value considers the national poverty line, the existing monthly transfer values of the
Basic Needs Poverty Line, the Family Assistance Programme transfer values of DSW/MWCSP, and the payout amount of the
parametric insurance. Impact of tropical cyclones can compound vulnerabilities and increase financial needs on existing household
vulnerability and financial gaps. The AA intervention will match the current level of transfer value (FJD200) for the social protection
programme cash transfers. This is also to harmonize anticipatory cash transfers with regular cash assistance leveraging the
Government’s social protection system.

Cash assurance
As appropriate, the Government and WFP will put in place a set of standards and priority risk-mitigation measures to ensure the
right people receive the right amount of money at the right time, while mitigating the risks of human error or other divergence of
benefits to the extent possible. These priority risk mitigation measures include sound programme design; adequate capacity of
financial service providers; segregation of duties of staff; data protection; reliable data to pay people; verification of beneficiaries;
transfer reconciliation; effective CFM; and regular monitoring.

The transfer value is proposed by the Department of Social Welfare and final determination will be done in collaboration
with the national cash working group.
29
Minimum expenditure basket is defined as what a household requires to meet their essential needs and its average
cost.
28

74

Geographical targeting and beneficiary selection
The Government and WFP will jointly identify and target populations in priority areas, as per targeting procedures agreed with
stakeholders, expecting to reach an estimated 15,000 households through the joint implementation of targeted anticipatory cash
transfers. Geographical targeting of the priority areas will be determined upon the monitoring of the cyclone path/rainfall pattern
depending on the pre-agreed triggers. The most vulnerable of the existing beneficiaries of social protection schemes, namely: 1)
the Poverty Benefit Scheme, 2) the Care and Protection Allowance, 3) the Disability Allowance and 4) the Social Pension Scheme,
will be selected for the assistance. Due to limited funding, the project will prioritize 15,000 most vulnerable and at-risk individuals
and their households using criteria set by the Government in consultation with stakeholders including the communities. Older
persons, people living with disabilities, women and people living below the poverty line are considered the most vulnerable in the
four social protection schemes and will be prioritized as direct beneficiaries of the anticipatory cash transfers. The Government
shall select the Beneficiaries in accordance with the criteria described in this Project Plan and following the procedure set out in
the SOP.
Capacity strengthening
The Government and WFP will collaborate to support the capacity strengthening activities for district governments’ social
protection focal points through a set of trainings. The trainings will include topics to ensure smooth implementation of the Project,
such as Anticipatory Action fundamentals, cash assurance, transfer mechanisms, monitoring, accountability to affected
populations, and early warning messages. The training will bring together approximately 50 district government social protection
focal points for a one and half day session in October 2023, before the cyclone season starts.
Communication with communities
During the preparedness phase, WFP, UNICEF, and other UN agencies will support DSW to design and implement sensitization
and outreach activities to ensure beneficiaries and their communities fully understand the scope of the project (consent, eligibility
criteria, transfer value, payment process, project duration), the community feedback mechanisms in place, the early warning
system, what to do before the impact of cyclones, and early warning dissemination channels (SMS, community radios and
announcements at religious sites). WFP and UNICEF will also provide trainings to relevant government officials at national and
district level and personnel at distribution points.
Once the activation triggers are met, messaging will be distributed by the Government in Fijian, Hindi, and English language to
ensure that communities are adequately informed to prepare for the forecasted cyclone. To the extent possible, the Government’s
community feedback mechanism will be supported by WFP and UNICEF to absorb increased demand for rapid case management.
Emergency preparedness and system strengthening
The Government and WFP will provide strengthen existing government social protection systems to generate evidence to further
strengthen the DSW’s capacity to anticipate, prepare for, and respond to future climate-induced shocks and return to normal
programming after the response. Critically, the pilot will provide the opportunity to review the current social protection cash
delivery systems to identify risks and risk mitigation measures to ensure rapid and assured cash transfers once activation triggers
are met.
Monitoring and learning
The Government and WFP will jointly design and implement monitoring and reporting activities. National systems will be leveraged
to undertake monitoring activities during and after the implementation of the anticipatory cash transfers. The post distribution
monitoring30 will assess the impact of the intervention on beneficiaries and how the anticipatory cash transfers helped to mitigate
the impact, which will help DSW and WFP to develop any corrective measures on the social protection schemes in the future. In
addition, WFP in collaboration with the Government will organize a joint lesson learned and best practices event to document the
overall experience in this project. This approach will ensure accountability to stakeholders through information sharing and also
provide learning to inform future anticipatory action design and decisions of the Government, as well as other governments within
the Pacific region.

Information of persons indirectly benefiting from this project apart from the household members of the targeted 5,000
recipients will be collected through post distribution monitoring
30

75

Partnerships and coordination
The overall project coordination is led by the Government’s National Disaster Management Office with technical support and
collaboration with OCHA’s Regional Office for Pacific Islands in Fiji. UN agencies including WFP, UNICEF, FAO, UNFPA and UN
Women will jointly provide coordinated support for the anticipatory cash transfer processes using each agencies’ comparative
advantages to maximize efficiency and effectiveness of the Project. The FCWG 31 will provide a platform for operational
coordination, standardization, harmonization, and learning related to multi-sector cash and voucher assistance in emergency
preparedness and response activities in Fiji. In addition to the collaboration with UN agencies, WFP will work closely with relevant
government departments that will provide leadership throughout the design and implementation of the project. The overall joint
responsibilities of the government are also provided in Article IV of the contract. The implementation of the project will be done
in coordination with and under the leadership of Department of Social Protection lead in Fiji and National Disaster Management
Office (NDMO). These partnerships between line ministries, UN agencies, local NGOs and community-based organizations will
ensure a coordinated humanitarian response, strengthen national capacity, and help steer future anticipatory action based on
evidence and learning generated.

Roles and Responsibilities
National Disaster Risk Management Office
• Provide overall leadership of the design and implementation of the project through coordination of key stakeholder
consultations and communications between governmental and other stakeholders.
• Determine the readiness and activation triggers for anticipatory cash transfers together with Fiji Meteorological Service
and OCHA and declare when the triggers are met.
• Coordinate the development of the Post Distribution Monitoring operational plan with the Ministry of Women, Children
and Social Protection (MWCSP), WFP and other stakeholders.
• Provide staff to participate in and support joint monitoring with MWCSP and WFP at least once during the project
implementation period.
Ministry of Finance
• Receive funds from WFP through the Government’s Consolidated Account on behalf of the Government of Fiji.
•
Transfer funds to the MWCSP upon request from MWCSP. The request to Ministry of Finance will be sent through a
Request for Release of Ad Hoc Donor Funds Checklist which will be completed by MWCSP and submitted to Ministry
of Finance when the funds are allocated.
•
Disburse funds to MWCSP through the small grant allocation process within 24 hours of fund transfer request receipt.
•
Create an internal transfer fund allocation number for WFP for accountability purposes. This specific allocation will
record all transactions from WFP funds in the Government's Financial Management Information System.
•
Receive reconciliation of funds by MWCSP with supporting documents and using the information to support the
preparation of an end of project accountability report for WFP within three months after the end of the project.
•
Attend coordination meetings as per invitations from NDMO.
Ministry of Women, Children and Social Protection
• Develop and maintain updated beneficiary lists with minimum information needed to make the cash transfers for
programme planning purposes.
• Collaborate with WFP and other UN agencies to provide an effective communication to beneficiaries, their communities,
and relevant MWCSP staff at the field level during the project period. Messaging to beneficiaries should to include but all
relevant project information such as entitlements, eligibility criteria and duration of project.
• Through the Poverty Monitoring Unit of MWCSP, lead and support the WFP and NDMO for monitoring purposes (postdistribution monitoring exercise) through provision of staff to participate in and support joint monitoring with NDMO
and WFP within three months after cyclone hits, at least once during the project implementation period.
• Request funds from the Ministry of Finance by filling in the Request for Release of Ad Hoc Donor Funds Checklist and
submitting it to the Ministry of Finance immediately after the readiness triggers are declared.
• Transfer funds to the agreed target beneficiaries under the Poverty Benefit Scheme, Care and Protection Allowance
The FCWG is composed of the cash and voucher assistance community of practice that includes, but not limited to,
NGOs, UN agencies, community-based organizations of people's organizations, financial service providers, micro-finance
institutions, rural and commercial banks, remittance centres, and government line ministries.
31

76

•
•
•
•
•

Scheme, Disability Allowance Scheme, and Social Pension Scheme in priority areas projected to be impacted by the
forecasted cyclone.
Manage partnerships with financial service providers for the project. This will include orientation on the anticipatory
action approach, coordination to ensure timely cash transfers within the defined timeframe.
Facilitate reconciliation of funds provided by WFP with supporting documents and submitting this information to Ministry
of Finance.
Use the reconciliation information to support the preparation of an end of project accountability report for WFP within
three months after the end of the project.
Jointly organize with WFP a workshop after project completion to facilitate internal and external discussions on lessons
learnt for continuous learning and recommendations for improvements in the future.
Prepare and submit a final project report to WFP.

United Nations World Food Programme
• Disburse funds to the Government’s Programme Account to cover both transfer value for the Beneficiaries and the
withdrawal fees of the FSP and the Government. Disbursement of funds will be made in accordance with the MoU.
• Support review existing set up of the Community Feedback Mechanism for management the complaints and feedback
from beneficiaries and their communities.
• Provide technical support for rapid cash transfers preparedness of existing government social protection delivery
mechanisms to ensure timely cash transfer by Department of Social Welfare
• Support the government in the design and implementation of the process and output monitoring of the anticipatory cash
transfers including post distribution monitoring.

Cross Cutting Issues
Accountability to Affected Populations
The Government, in collaboration with WFP, will ensure that the targeted communities, including vulnerable population groups
such as households headed by women, older persons, children and people with disabilities will be provided with appropriate,
accessible, and timely information on the proposed anticipatory cash transfer, such as transfer amount, project duration, and
other related aspects. To reach all people in the project area, the information will be provided in local languages during the
community level meetings, and this will be facilitated through the DSW field level teams. Given that this is a vertical expansion of
the Government social protection system, WFP will not set up a separate CFM. Instead, WFP will support DSW and NDMO in the
management of its own CFM and process, to ensure any irregularities are addressed.
Gender
The government will implement anticipatory cash transfer taking account of gender sensitivity. Gender considerations, including

contribution to greater gender equality and women’s economic empowerment, will be at the core of WFP’s technical support to
the Government. The anticipatory cash transfers will be implemented in coordination with MWCSP, an active partner of UN
agencies currently working on gender-sensitive programming, and the lead of the Fiji Safety and Protection Cluster. By using
Government Social Safety Net platforms for anticipatory cash transfers, the Government and WFP will be able to leverage existing
systems to strengthen the Government’s efforts on gender, help make social protection systems become more gender-sensitive
and improve vulnerable women's immediate access to food.
Gender-based violence
Given that this Project is for a one-off emergency assistance with limited timeframe, WFP will not be able to support the
Government to respond to gender-based violence in a comprehensive manner, however, to the extent possible WFP will support
the Government to ensure that risks of gender-based violence are identified and mitigated, and any instance of gender-based
violence encountered is reported and responded to during the Project.
Disability Inclusion
This Project is designed to address the preparedness of the persons with disabilities who are beneficiaries of the Disability
Allowance scheme and live in the priority response area. The Government and WFP will ensure meaningful access to
communication channels including CFMs, sensitization materials, and field monitors for all persons with disabilities during the
Project to identify their barriers, and their unique needs are adequately met with reasonable accommodations.

77

Project Timeframe
The project activities are estimated to be completed within a three-month period from when the readiness and activation triggers
are met. The table below provides critical actions that will take place should the triggers be met in the event of cyclones.
Activities
Preparation Phase
Revised MoU and project document preparation
MoU signing
Implementation Phase32
On going monitoring of tropical cyclones
Declaration of triggers
OCHA transfers funds to WFP
WFP transfers funds to the Government
Early warning messaging and beneficiary sensitization to all
locations on cyclones path
Government transfers funds to FSP
Anticipatory cash transfers to people at risk of the cyclone
Monitoring and CFM follow ups
Review Phase
After Action Review

Responsible Agency(ies)

Timeline

WFP
WFP/DSW

December 2025
January 2026

NDMO/OCHA/FMS
FMS/NDMO
OCHA
WFP
WFP/UN AGENCIES/DSW

Jan ‘26 – Apr ‘27
Jan ‘26 – Apr ‘27
Jan ‘26 – Apr ‘27
Jan ‘26 – Apr ‘27
Jan ‘26 – Apr ‘27

MoF/DSW
DSW
DSW/WFP

Jan ‘26 – Apr ‘27
Jan ‘26 – Apr ‘27
Jan ‘26 – Apr ‘27

OCHA/UN AGENCIES

Post Distribution Monitoring and documentation

WFP/DSW

3 to 4 weeks after
TC/Flood
AA
transfers
2 to 4 weeks after
TC/Flood
AA
transfers

Figure 1: Flow of actions upon triggers

32

The implementation phase activities and timelines are dependent on when the tropical cycles may happen which can be between November 2023
and March 2024. The detailed sequence of events upon declaration of triggers is in the SOP.

78

1. Readiness Trigger
- OCHA transfer
funds to WFP
-5 DAYS

3. EW messaging and CFM
set up and FSP
preparation/government
transfers to FSP

2. WFP HQ transfers
funds to WFP Fiji
MCO
- 5 DAYS

6. Cash distributions
and monitoring

5. MWCSP transfers
cash to FSPs

- 3 DAYS to - 1 DAY

- 3 DAYS

- 5 DAYS to - 0 DAYS

4. Activation Trigger - WFP
MCO transfers to
government
MWCSP transfers money to
FSPs
- 3 DAYS

9. Post Distribution
Monitoring/Documentation
and Learning

8. After Action
Review

7. Tropical Cyclone
Landfall And
Impact

1- 2 WEEK AFTER
EVENT

2 WEEKS AFTER CASH
DISTRIBUTIONS

D-DAY

Operational Presence and Access
The WFP Pacific Multi-Country Office is located in Suva, Fiji. In close collaboration with the DSW and NDMO field level offices, WFP
will provide remote monitoring support to ensure the quality and smooth implementation of the project.

ANNEX 2:
Plan of Operation and Standard Operating Procedures
(Document attached separately)

ANNEX 3:
79

Estimated Budget
Number of households

FJD*

USD

Transfer value

15,000

2,970,000.00

1,320,000.00

Transfer Cost and
Withdraw fees

15,000

101,250.00

45,000.00

MWCSP Administration
costs

45,000.00

20,000.00

Total Estimated Budget

3,116,250.00

1,385,000.00

*FJD amount may vary based on foreign currency exchange rate at time of transfer

80

ANNEX 4:
Distribution/Financial Reconciliation Report
Transfer Details
Region/District Number of
planned
households
(HHs)

Total
entitlement
(FJD)

Number
of HHs
Assisted Successful
transfers
Bank Transfers

Number of
HHs Assisted
Unsuccessful
transfers

Cash balance
(FJD)

Subtotal
Mobile Money

Subtotal
Post Office

Subtotal
Grand Total

I, the………………………………………………………………………………………………… [title of the person] of the Department of Social Welfare,
Ministry of Women, Children and Social Protection hereby certify that the this report contains, true, complete and accurate
information and accounts of funds received from WFP and used to distribute benefits to beneficiaries for the Operation pursuant
to the MoU between the Government of Fiji and World Food Programme dated…………………………………………………………20…….
Department of Social Welfare

Certified by (DSW):
Name: …………………….
Title: ……………………...
Date: ……………………...

Received by (WFP):
Name: …………………….
Title: ……………………...
Date: ……………………...

ANNEX 5
81

Final Consolidated Distribution/Financial Reconciliation Report

Region/Distr
ict

Number
of
planned
househol
ds
(HHs)

Planned Cash
Distributions
(FJD)

Actual Cash Distributions (FJD)

Day 1

Day 2

Day 3

Postshock

Cash
Balance
(FJD)

Remarks

Bank Transfers

Subtotal
Mobile Money

Subtotal
Post Office

Subtotal
Grand Total

I, the……………………………………………………………………………………………………… [title of the person] of the Department of Social Welfare,
Ministry of Women, Children and Social Protection hereby certify that the this report contains, true, complete and accurate
information, financial statements and accounts of funds received from WFO and used to distribute benefits to beneficiaries for
the Operation pursuant to the MoU between the Government of Fiji and World Food Programme
dated………………………………………………………… 20…….

Certified by (DSW):
Name: …………………….
Title: ……………………...
Date: ……………………...

Received by (WFP):
Name: …………………….
Title: ……………………...
Date: ……………………...

ANNEX 6
82

DATA PROCESSING TERMS

According to the MoU WFP will provide technical assistance for rapid cash transfers preparedness of the government social
protection transfer mechanisms (Article 1.2.a). In particular, WFP shall provide to the Government technical assistance and
guidance on anticipatory action cash transfers preparedness of the existing social protection mechanisms (Article 5.5). The
Government has designated the Ministry of Women, Children and Social Protection (the “Executing Agency”) as the executing
agency for this Operation (article 4.1). In order to execute this Operation, the Executing Agency will process personal data. To the
extent that WFP’s assistance and guidance entails the processing of the Executing Agency’s personal data by WFP, the following
data processing terms shall apply to both Parties. Any terms not defined herein shall have the meanings set out in other parts of
the MoU.
1.

DEFINITIONS

1.1 “Controller” means the natural or legal person which, alone or jointly with others, determines the purposes and means of
the processing of Personal Data. For the purposes of this Annex, the Executing Agency acts as the Controller of the
Beneficiaries’ personal data.

1.2 “Data Subject” means the individual or individuals to whom the personal data processed under this MoU relates.
1.3 “Personal Data” means any information relating to a Data Subject, in particular by reference to an identifier such as a name,
an identification number, location data, an online identifier or to one or more factors specific to the physical, physiological,
genetic, mental, economic, cultural or social identity of that natural person. Personal Data covers digital as well as non-digital
information that is provided to the Processor (as defined below) by or on behalf of the Controller or is obtained by the
Processor in connection with Processor’s activities under Articles 1.2.a) and 5.5 of the MoU.

1.4 “Process” or “processing” (or any variation thereof) means any operation or set of operations that is performed on Personal
Data, whether or not by automatic means, such as viewing, accessing, collection, recording, organization, storage, adaptation
or alteration, retrieval, consultation, use, disclosure by transmission, anonymization, dissemination or otherwise making
available, alignment, combination, blocking, erasure or destruction.

1.5 “Privacy Rules” means, regarding WFP, its applicable data protection rules, principles and guidelines and regarding the
Executing Agency, its applicable data protection laws.

1.6 “Processor” means a natural or legal person (including public authority, agency, NGO or other body) which processes
Personal Data on behalf of the Controller. WFP acts as the Processor of the Personal Data provided by the Controller within
the context of Articles 1.2.a) and 5.5 of the MoU for the provision of the agreed technical assistance and guidance.
2.

DATA PROCESSING TERMS

The Controller accepts to provide the Processor access to Personal Data for the purposes described in Articles 1.2.a) and 5.5 of the
MoU. The Processor undertakes to process such Personal Data on behalf of the Controller and according to the following terms:
o

o
o
o

o
o

The Processor shall act solely in accordance with the Controller´s written instructions, to the extent the Processor can do
so in accordance with its rules and regulations, including Processor’s Privacy Rules; in case that the Controller’s instructions
contravene the Processor’s rules and regulations, the Processor will immediately inform the Controller, in writing.
The Processor shall only process the Personal Data for the purposes of performing its obligations under Articles 1.2. a) and
5.5 of the MoU as well as its obligations under the Processor’s Privacy Rules;
The Processor shall inform the Controller in the event of a breach of its obligations under this Annex.
The Processor shall only disclose, give access to or share the Personal Data with subcontractors contractually engaged by
the Processor to provide the technical assistance and guidance set out in Articles 1.2.a) and 5.5 of the MoU. Any other
disclosure of Personal Data will be subject to the Controller’s authorization.
The Processor shall keep confidential the Personal Data, even after the expiry or termination of the MoU.
The Processor shall implement and maintain all the appropriate technical and organizational measures necessary to ensure
the security of the Personal Data.

83

o
o

o

The Processor shall inform the Controller promptly by email, after the Processor has discovered or become aware of a data
security breach involving the Personal Data processed on behalf of the Controller.
The Processor shall cooperate with the Controller in providing the relevant information related to any requests received
from Data Subjects who exercise their data protection rights vis-à-vis the Controller. The Processor shall not be responsible
for responding these data protection requests.
Upon the termination of the MoU, the Processor shall either return to the Controller or destroy the Personal Data. The
Processor shall be entitled to keep the Personal Data until the end of its applicable data retention periods according to the
Processor’s rules and regulations.

ANNEX 7
WFP GENDER POLICY 2022
(printed copy to be attached

ANNEX 8
WFP HUMANITARIAN PROTECTION POLICY
Printed Copy to be attached

ANNEX 9
ANTI FRAUD ANTI CORRUPTION POLICY
Printed Copy to be attached

ANNEX 10
SG BULLETIN ON SPECIAL MEASURES ON PSEA
printed copy to be attached

84

Annex 9 - Common Early Warning Messages
Early Warning Messages

Target audience

Communication
channel

Language

Readiness trigger
(up to 120 hours)

Activation trigger
(up to 72 hours)

v

v

v

v

v

v

v

v

v

v

CATEGORY 1: MOVEMENT
In case of flooding, do not cross or swim in rivers, streams,
drains, roads and walkways where water is above your ankles.
Supervise your children, do not let them swim or cross flooded
rivers, streams, drains, and roads.

The public, Parents,
caretakers

Radio, TV, SMS
Blast, Social
media

English, iTaukei,
Hindi

The weather conditions over the next days could cause poor
visibility and traffic disruptions. Do not drive before you read the
advisories on the Fiji NDRMO website https://www.ndmo.gov.fj/or
Facebook https://www.facebook.com/FijiNDMO.

Drivers, Public
Transport Operators

Radio, TV, SMS
Blast, Social
media

English, iTaukei,
Hindi

Move to safety while it is daylight or while it is safe to do so.
Should you need any assistance, contact the Fiji Police Force on
917, the National Fire Authority (NFA) on 910, or the Fiji Roads
Authority on 5720. Assist the elderly or persons with disabilities,
pregnant women while moving to safety.

The public,
Caregivers, PWD
Organisations and
PWDs.

Radio, TV, SMS
Blast, Social
media

English, iTaukei,
Hindi

Move to higher grounds while it is safe to do so. Should you
need any assistance, contact the Fiji Police Force on 917 , the
National Fire Authority (NFA) on 910, or Fiji Roads Authority on
5720 NB: Merge this message with Move while it is daylight.

The public (consider
adding further
instructions for
people with
disabilities)

Radio, TV, SMS
Blast, Social
media

English, iTaukei,
Hindi

Look after your pets and move livestock to higher and safe
grounds or shelter).

Pet owners and
farmers

Radio and SMS
Blasts, Social
Media

English, iTaukei,
Hindi

85

CATEGORY 2: ACCESS TO INFORMATION
Follow the latest weather and public advisories on radio and TV
or visit the Fiji NDRMO website https://www.ndmo.gov.fj/or
Facebook https://www.facebook.com/FijiNDMO. Be ready to
evacuate if needed.

The public

Know your emergency contacts: 910 for National Fire Authority, 913
for Energy Fiji Limited, 911 for Ambulance, 5720 for Fiji Roads
Authority, 917 for Police, 5777 for Water Authority of Fiji.

The public

As we get ready for power outages, prepare power banks and a
battery-powered radio to tune into public advisories from
government. Keep your phone with emergency contacts charged at
all times.

The public

Radio, TV, SMS
Blast, Social
media

English, iTaukei,
Hindi

Radio, TV, SMS
Blast, Social
media

English, iTaukei,
Hindi

Radio, TV, SMS
Blast, Social
media

English, iTaukei,
Hindi

Radio, TV, SMS
Blast, Social
media

English, itaukei,
Hindi

v

v

v

v

v

v

CATEGORY 3: HEALTH AND PERSONAL SAFETY

Prepare your emergency kit with:
first-aid kit with essential medicines
important documents
candles
bottled or boiled drinking water
canned food
battery powered radio
torch
spare batteries

The public

v

86

Prepare your first aid kit with band-aids, bandage, antiseptic wipes,
antibiotic ointment, thermometer, essential medicine such as pain
relievers, cough and cold medicine, anti-diarrhea medication, and
antihistamine. Have sufficient prescription medications on hand.

The public, elderly,
sickly

Radio, TV, SMS
Blast, Social
media

English, itaukei,
Hindi

Store copies of your medical records, allergies, and important
health information in a waterproof container.

The public
(parents, the
elderly)

Radio, TV, SMS
Blast, Social
media

English, itaukei,
Hindi

v

v

Ensure you have contact information for nearby medical facilities,
emergency services, and local hospitals in case of emergency.

The public
(parents, the
elderly)

Radio, TV, SMS
Blast, Social
media

English, itaukei,
Hindi

v

v

If you or your family members have special medical needs such as
using of special medical equipment, contact your doctor now or
arrange for alternate care location during power outages.

The public
(parents, the
elderly, disabled,
caretakers)

Radio, TV, SMS
Blast, Social
media

English, itaukei,
Hindi

During prolonged power outages and floodings, follow these steps
not to get sick:
Do not eat spoiled food and dispose it immediately.
Wash raw fruits and vegetables before consumption.
Boil, filter or chlorinate untreated drinking water and store it
properly.
Wash your hands with
soap before eating and after going to the toilet or touching animals

The public
(community leaders,
parents)

Radio, TV, SMS
Blast, Social
media

English, itaukei,
Hindi

Continue breastfeeding your baby.

Mothers

Radio, TV, SMS
Blast, Social
media

v

v

English, itaukei,
Hindi

v

v

v

v

87

Prepare enough food and water. Boil, filter or chlorinate all
untreated drinking water and store it properly.

The public (parents,
caretakers)

Radio, TV, SMS
Blast, Social
media

English, itaukei,
Hindi

v

Ensure that you and your family practice good hygiene at all
times.

The public (parents,
caretakers)

Radio, TV, SMS
Blast, Social
media

English, itaukei,
Hindi

v

v

Check on the elderly, neighbours and persons with disabilities.
Keep children indoors.

The public
(community leaders,
parents)

Radio, TV, SMS
Blast, Social
media

English, itaukei,
Hindi

v

v

Severe weather events can be accompanied with stress and
anxiety. As we prepare for the upcoming cyclone, check on people
around, especially children, persons with disabilities and the elderly.
Try to address their concerns and fears.

The public
(community leaders,
parents)

Radio, TV, SMS
Blast, Social
media

English, itaukei,
Hindi

Secure your important external home appliances such as solar
panels, tv antennas that can be damaged during disasters.

Homeowners

Radio, Tv, SMS
Blast, Social
media

English, itaukei,
Hindi

v

v

Ensure that your water sources are well secured. water tank is
filled with clean water, secure the tanks, disconnect the
guttering.

Homeowners
(parents,
caretakers)

Radio, Tv, SMS
Blast, Social
media

English, itaukei,
Hindi

v

v

Coastal dwellers are advised to secure boats and items that may
float and damage property. Stay informed on the weather updates
for flood alerts and warnings through Fiji Met Services and NDRMO.
take note of high and low tides to be better prepared. Avoid going
out to seas during bad weather conditions. (Fiji Met/NDMO Web/FB
Link)

The public living
close to the
coast/boat owners

Radio, Tv, SMS
Blast, Social
media

English, itaukei,
Hindi
v

v

v

CATEGORY 4: ASSET AND LIVELIHOODS PROTECTION

88

Harvest mature crops, fruits and vegetables and store in safe
spaces or water-tight containers.

Farmers

Store farming tools and machineries in safe spaces.

Farmers

Radio, Tv, SMS
Blast, Social
media

English, itaukei,
Hindi

v

v

Radio, Tv, SMS
Blast, Social
media

English, itaukei,
Hindi

v

v

89

Annex 10 - Common Early Warning Messages Testing Results
In November 2023 WHO led the testing of the EWMs in Annex 10. The results of the testing are outlined below.

Methodology
The research was conducted on the Stickybeak platform to understand which messages were most
motivating to take action before a cyclone
•
•

Survey audiences were recruited via Facebook, Messenger and Instagram from 3-5 November 2023
Total respondents were segmented by:
○ Gender: Male (n=85) Female (n=115)
○ Age: 18-34 (n=79) 35-54 (n=74) 55+ (n=47)
○ Geography: Fiji ○ Parent or caregiver (n=166)
○ Live with people with a disability (n=38)

Note: Segment sample sizes are small and should be treated with caution.

Key Findings
58% of those surveyed feel prepared for a cyclone, with 28% feeling unprepared
•
•
•
•
•
•

All three messages are motivating, and the instructional message about ‘securing your home etc’
was the most motivating
The message option that including a timeframe in relation to getting an emergency kit ready was
slightly more motivating overall, but even more motivating with those who are feeling unprepared
(rated 1 or 2 in Ques 1)
‘Staying tuned…’ vs ‘Follow the latest’ was more motivating in relation messaging encouraging
respondents to listen to media updates
English is preferred by over 80% of respondents (note survey was run in English only)
The most trusted source of information is the NDRMO office.
Radio is the main communication channel for keeping updated regarding cyclone information Based
on these findings, messages that are more concise / singular with a greater sense of urgency
appear to be more motivating for people to take action.

90

91

92

93

94

Annex 11 – Coordination Standard Operating Procedure
OCHA

NDRMO

AA Partners Agencies Line Ministries

Divisional
Commissionaires

Provincial
Administrators/
District Officers

Briefs InterCluster Group
(ICG) and
Commissionaires
to ensure
operational
readiness.

-

Works with AA
partners and the
clusters to ensure
AA activities are
ready to be
implemented.

-

Attends briefing
session.
Briefs District
Officers (DOs) on
the Anticipatory
Action Pilot.

-

NDRMO informs
the Permanent
Secretary about
the readiness
trigger.
Inform the
Divisional
Commissionaires
about readiness
triggers.
NDRMO reshares
community
sensitisation

-

Supports AA
readiness activities
implementation.
Updates relevant
Commissionaires
on targeting
decisions.
Keep informed
Disaster Service
Liaison Officers
(DSLOs).

-

Reinforces EWMs
and awareness
video with DOs.
Shares
community
information sheet
with DOs.

-

Trigger Monitoring Period
-

-

Convenes AA
Group meetings
to ensure
operational
readiness
Keeps monitoring
Fiji Met Services
and NDRMO
website

Readiness Trigger
-

-

OCHA Centre for
Humanitarian
Data releases
automated
Official Readiness
Trigger
Notification to AA
Partners, Line
Ministries,
Divisional
Commissionaires, UN Resident
Coordinator and
NDRMO.

-

Works with Line
Ministries to ensure
AA activities are
ready to be
implemented.

-

Activates
communication with
line ministers.
Implements
readiness activities.
Updates 5Ws (if
anything is being
implemented).
Shares targeting
decisions with
OCHA.

-

-

-

-

-

-

Attend briefing
session by
Divisional
Commissionaires.
Brief Community
Leaders on
Anticipatory
Action Pilot.

Reinforces EWMs
and awareness
video with
Community
Leaders.
Shares
community
information sheet
with Community
Leaders.

95

-

-

-

-

OCHA Centre for
Humanitarian
Data releases
automated
readiness trigger
information
emails to AA
partners,
NDRMO, Line
Ministries and
Commissioners.
CERF releases
funds to AA
partner agencies
(up to 15% only
can be spent for
readiness
activities)
OCHA activates
AA Viber group for
informal
information
sharing.
OCHA convenes
daily AA
coordination
meetings and
shares
consolidated
updates with
NDRMO and PHT.

-

-

sheet and video
with
commissionaires
and sectors via
Viber groups.
EWMs and
community
awareness videos
are shared on
social media,
radio and TV
through Get
Ready (UNICEFNDRMO).
NEOC is put on
standby.
NDRMO issues
advisory

96

Activation Trigger
-

-

-

OCHA Centre for
Humanitarian
Data releases
automated
Official Activation
Trigger
Notification to AA
partners,
NDRMO, Line
Ministries and
Commissioners.
OCHA Centre for
Humanitarian
Data releases
automated
activation trigger
information
emails to AA
partners,
NDRMO, Line
Ministries and
Commissioners.
CERF funds can
be spent by
agencies.
OCHA shares
impact model
map issued by
NDMRO with AA
partners.

-

-

-

-

NDRMO officially
the PS about the
activation trigger
[forwards official
trigger email].
NEOC is
activated. ECs
are activated if
needed.
NDRMO shares
AA updates
(received by
OCHA) to ICG if
convened.
Joint UN-Fiji Gov
Press Release is
finalized and
issued

-

-

-

-

Confirms
geographical
targeting decision
with OCHA and Line
Ministries (based on
1st activation path
received and
NDRMO impact
model)
Jointly with Line
Ministry, inform via
official email the
Divisional
Commissionaires
responsible for the
implementation
area.
Once in the Division,
report in person to
Divisional EOC.
Implements AA
activation in
communication with
line ministries and
clusters.
Reports on
implementation to
line ministries.
Shares targeting
decision and
implementation

-

-

-

-

Jointly with
implementing
agency, inform via
official email the
Divisional
Commissionaires
responsible for the
implementation
area.
Report in person to
Divisional EOC.
Supports AA
activities
implementation.
Shares
implementation
updates with the
clusters.
Reports on
implementation to
Commissionaires,
DOs and PAs.
Keep informed
Disaster Service
Liaison Officers
(DSLOs).

-

-

-

-

Activate
provincial and
District EOCs.
Ensures PAs and
DOs are aware
about the AA
activition if their
division is being
targeted.
Ensures
widespread
dissemination of
EWMs with
community
leaders.
Guide geographic
targeting based
on collected
information.
Shares SitReps
based on inputs
from line
ministries.

-

-

-

Ensure
Communitybased Disaster
Risk Management
Committees are
aware of AA
activation if their
district is
targeted.
Ensures
Communitybased Disaster
Risk Management
Committees
actively engaging
with EWMs and
Advisory.
Guide geographic
targeting based on
collected
information.

97

-

-

OCHA convenes
daily AA
coordination
meetings and
shares
consolidated
updates to
NDRMO and PHT.
OCHA finalises
draft joint UN-Fiji
Gov press
release.

-

Post Landfall – Response Phase
-

-

-

Shares
consolidated 5Ws
platform with
NDRMO and PHT.
Updates PHT on
the Cyclone? and
AA completed
activities.
Supports
agencies in
reprogramming
AA to RR (if
needed)

Post-Crisis
-

Organizes
LLW/AAR with
NDRMO.

-

-

-

-

Shares
consolidated
information on
completed AA
activities with
ICG.
Creates impact
model with
landfall cyclone
path.
Starts
assessment with
IDA form (with AA
questions
included).

-

-

Attends/organizes LLW/AAR.

updates with OCHA
and in Viber group
and at AA
coordination
meetings and
through live
template.
Updates 5Ws

Shares updates on
completed AA
activities with OCHA
and line Ministries.
Updates 5Ws
Reprogrammes
activities to RR if
needed.

-

Shares updated on
completed AA
activities with the
Commissionaires,
the clusters,
DSLOs, PAs and
DOs.

-

Updates SitReps
Rollout
assessments
with IDAs (with
AA question
included)

-

Participates in the
LLW/AAR.

-

Participates in the
LLW/AAR.

-

Participates in
the LLW/AAR.

-

Provide SitReps
information to
Divisional
Commissionaires.

98

-

Supports
coordination of
data collection for
the multistakeholder
evaluation

-

Supports multistakeholder
evaluation data
collection

-

Conducts activityspecific evaluation.
Participates in
multistakeholder
evaluation data
collection

-

Participates in
multistakeholder
evaluation data
collection.

99

Annex 12 – IDA Forms
Anticipatory Action Evaluation Questions to be added to the community level data collection form of the Initial
Disaster Assessment
1. Did this community or any households in the community receive any of the following types of support
within the week before the cyclone? Multiple-Choice Read Responses
______ [1] Water and sanitation kit (water treatment/storage supplies)
______ [2] Shelter kit (items to reinforce house)
______ [3] Boat strengthening kit
______ [4] Hermetic bag (for dry storage)
______ [5] Hygiene items or dignity kit
______ [6] Menstrual hygiene supplies / kit
______ [7] Multi-purpose cash transfer
______ [8] Temporary learning space
______ [9] Health facility support
______ [10] Evacuation center
______ [11] Early warning messaging
______ [99] Other (Specify (If 99): ______________)
______ [0] None
2. Did this community or any households in the community receive any of the following types of support
within the week after the cyclone? Multiple-Choice Read Responses
______ [1] Water and sanitation kit (water treatment/storage supplies)
______ [2] Shelter kit (items to reinforce house)
______ [3] Boat strengthening kit
______ [4] Hermetic bag (for dry storage)
______ [5] Hygiene items or dignity kit
______ [6] Menstrual hygiene supplies / kit
______ [7] Multi-purpose cash transfer
______ [8] Temporary learning space
______ [9] Health facility support
______ [10] Evacuation center
______ [11] Early warning messaging
100

______ [99] Other (Specify (If 99): ______________)
______ [0] None

101

Annex 13 – Awareness Sheet for Community Leaders
Anticipatory Action Pilot for Tropical Cyclones in Fiji
Testing a New Way to Prepare for Cyclones
Acting early saves lives and keeps your community safe. Anticipatory action is a pilot project, which
introduces a new way of providing communities with humanitarian aid before the cyclone hits. This aid is
given in the time between the forecast and the cyclone's landfall, allowing communities to act early and
protect their lives and livelihoods. Use it before the disaster to become more resilient and keep themselves
safe.
Here's what's happening:
What's a Trigger?
A trigger works like an early warning that alerts us about an approaching tropical cyclone. It relies on
weather forecasts from the Fiji Meteorological Services. If there's a severe cyclone expected and/or heavy
rainfall that meets the pre-agreed conditions, we will activate our plan.
Getting Ready Before the Cyclone:
Communities within the direct forecasted path of the cyclone may receive assistance before its arrival.
This support is designed to enhance safety as the cyclone approaches. It's a safety initiative we're testing,
focusing on areas where the cyclone might hit the hardest.
How Does it Work?
Different kinds of help have been planned, and they will be given to different groups of people in the
forecasted cyclone path based on their vulnerabilities. This happens before the cyclone hits, so families
can prepare and stay safe. Items on this list will be distributed by various partners:
•

•
•
•
•
•
•
•

Cash Aid: To assist the most vulnerable families in getting what they need urgently. Selected
households on the Department of Social Welfare’s Family Assistance Scheme, Care and
Protection Allowance, Disability Allowance and Social Pension Scheme may receive a top-up
of FJD 200 to prepare for the cyclone. Money could be spent on items such as evacuation,
food, medicines, communications, batteries etc.
Watery, Hygiene and Sanitation Kits: Supplies for staying clean and safe during the cyclone.
Special Kits for Women: Helping pregnant women and women with disabilities stay
comfortable and safe.
Education Materials: Materials to help children continue with their education even during the
cyclone.
Tools to Strengthen Shelters: Equipment to make homes stronger against the storm.
Farmers' Supplies: Tools to protect farmers' resources.
Fishing Support: Tools to help fishermen protect their boats.
Alongside this aid, communities will receive early warning messages with instructions on
how to prepare for the cyclone.

How We Decide Who Gets Help:

102

It's crucial to note that not everyone will receive every type of aid. Each specific item will go to those who
need it the most. We aim to assist communities located where the storm is predicted to be most severe.
However, forecasting isn't 100% precise. Sometimes, we may unintentionally provide more help to areas
less impacted by the cyclone. We're learning from this process to improve our strategies for future events.
Your Role in Helping:
Help us explain this new plan to everyone in your community! Together, we can ensure everyone
understands the reasons behind receiving or not receiving support, how to use it before the cyclone arrives,
and how to stay safer when cyclones hit.

103

