Anticipatory Action Framework
Afghanistan - Drought
Draft 2 – 13 April 2025
Approved by the RC/HC on 14 April 2025
Endorsed by the ERC on 17 April 2025

Executive Summary
The humanitarian sector is scaling up anticipatory action (AA), enabling proactive mobilisation to get ahead of predictable
climate-related shocks and disease outbreaks through robust forecasting (triggers), pre-agreed activities, and pre-arranged
funding. This approach has proven effective, dignified, cost-efficient, and protective of development gains.
This document presents the framework for drought anticipatory action in Afghanistan. It entails coordinated packages of
assistance planned to be delivered to people at risk of spring drought in Afghanistan across four prioritised spring rain and
grain dependent provinces – Faryab, Sar-e-Pul, Takhar and Badakhshan. The framework was developed through a
participatory process of humanitarian partners who formed an Anticipatory Action Group, coordinated by OCHA, under the
overall leadership of the Deputy Special Representative of the Secretary-General/Resident Coordinator/Humanitarian
Coordinator (DSRSG/RC/HC).
The financing
The Emergency Relief Coordinator has approved $20 million combining pre-committed financing by the Central Emergency
Response Fund (CERF) and the Afghanistan Humanitarian Fund (AHF) – the first time a single framework has been backed
by both pooled funds. Payout of these funds will only occur if the pre-agreed trigger thresholds are reached. The funding
will allow humanitarian partners to provide multi-purpose cash ($4.2m) and in-kind and cash-based assistance across
Agriculture and Livelihoods ($2.6m), Food ($1m), Health ($4m), Nutrition ($2m), Protection ($1.3m), and WASH ($5m)
sectors. These figures are not yet final as the AHF funding envelopes are subject to Advisory Board approval.
The trigger
The financing and activities included in this framework will be triggered by either the following:
•
•

Forecast-based trigger (window A): If the February European Centre for Medium-Range Weather Forecasts (ECMWF)
predicts March-May rainfall below a 1-in-4.2-year threshold in at least one of three provinces.
Observation and forecast-based trigger (window B): If the composite indicator monitored in April is above its 1-in-5.2year return period threshold, in at least one of three provinces. (details are in the trigger section below)

The overall return period is 1-in-2.3, and the average number of years to allocate the full $10m in CERF funding is 1-in-3.4
years. Historical activation details for the framework are shown in the table below1.

The action plan
The framework will enable humanitarian partners to implement anticipatory activities in a coordinated manner. Activities
covered via CERF funding will be delivered both under Window A (after the first trigger) ($3.4m) and Window B (after
the second trigger) ($6.6m) and focus on food security and livelihoods, WASH, and Protection, while the AHF allocation
focuses in enabling response for Window B ($10m) with an increased focus on Health and Nutrition, while also
1

Budget-related figures only include the CERF budget.
The “overall return period” corresponds to years where at least one of the windows activates.
The “average period for total budget spend” is the average period for the whole CERF framework budget ($10M) to be spent on framework activations

2

complementing WASH and protection components. To promote choice and dignity among beneficiaries, and in response
to feedback gathered through Afghanistan’s Community Voices and Accountability Platform highlighting the affected
populations’ strong preference for cash assistance, both CERF- and AHF-funded activities include various forms of cash
assistance. CERF funding will be made available to UN agencies while the AHF funding will exclusively cover national and
international NGO partners. All activities identified are critical and align with the lifesaving criteria of the 2025 HNRP
reprioritisation (Strategic objective 1) as well as CERF/AHF’s lifesaving focus. All activities tied to each window will be
implemented in all four selected provinces, if the trigger thresholds for one of the three monitored provinces (Faryab, Sare-Pul, and Takhar) is exceeded. Even if not monitored, Badakhshan will also be included in the response on a no-regrets
basis but is not monitored.
The pre-agreed actions will focus on the following modalities:
•
•

•
•

Communicating risks, engaging with communities, and early warning messaging: early warnings, community
disease prevention and hygiene messaging.
Providing in-kind assistance: including food, drought tolerant seeds, livestock protection inputs, emergency medical,
dignity and hygiene supplies, therapeutic nutrition, and water infrastructure rehabilitation.
Provision of Select Types of Cash Assistance: This includes Multi-Purpose Cash Assistance (MPCA), sector-specific
cash, and integrated mixed-modality Cash+ packages, all aimed at strengthening household-level drought
preparedness based on self-identified priorities.
Facilitating access to services: through mobile health clinics, maternal and mental health services, nutrition
screening, water quality measures, referrals for protection needs, and disease surveillance and prevention services.

The learning
Partners have agreed to conduct a coordinated post-distribution monitoring exercise in the case of a framework activation.
FAO will undertake an impact evaluation primarily for livelihoods but with multi-sectoral observations on behalf of other
participating partners. An after-action review will further be conducted to gather lessons learned from the development and
potential implementation of the framework. Partners have also planned a broader / coordinated impact evaluation in 2026.
Validity period
The present framework is valid for an initial period of two years following endorsement of the ERC (2025-2026). The 2025
season will be a pilot phase given that it constitutes the first inter-agency anticipatory action experience in Afghanistan. For
2026, lessons learned from both the development and potential implementation of the framework will be applied to enhance
and increase the scope of the current framework in collaboration with the AA Group.

1. Drought in Afghanistan
Afghanistan remains among the most climate-vulnerable countries globally, ranked sixth by the Notre Dame Global
Adaptation Index and eighth by the INFORM Climate Change Risk Index. With a CERF Index for Risk and Vulnerability
score of 74/100 (as of July 2024), it is in the top five most vulnerable countries worldwide. According to the World Bank2,
from 1951 to 2023, Afghanistan’s mean annual temperature rose by approximately 2.46°c and future temperature increases
are predicted to exceed global averages, intensifying drought risks. By 2030, annual droughts may become normal in many
areas. Between 2020 and 2025, Afghanistan experienced repeated droughts, severely impacting coping capacities and
drastically reducing groundwater levels, in some cases by up to 30 meters. Despite predictions of favorable precipitation
during the 2023-24 El Niño, the country faced a dry spell, with precipitation deficits of up to 55 per cent below average in
eastern and northeastern regions, and moderate to mild deficits elsewhere. Rainfed winter wheat regions were particularly
affected.
La Niña typically brings below-average precipitation and higher temperatures. Compounding these issues, Afghanistan's
water and sanitation infrastructure remains inadequate, further stressing vulnerable communities. Previous CERF drought
allocations for Afghanistan have varied in size, with an average of $13.4 million via the rapid response window and $11.8m
via the underfunded emergencies window. Funding requests were typically submitted in April-May or August-October
periods.
Jan

Feb

Winter wet
season

Mar

Apr

May

Jun

Jul

Aug

Sep

Spring wet season
Spring wheat
planting

Nov

Dec

Winter wet season

Second season
planting

Poppy harvest

Winter wheat planting

Wheat and barley harvest

Lean season
Peak risk for spring
flooding

World Bank Climate Change Knowledge Portal – Afghanistan. Available online:
https://climateknowledgeportal.worldbank.org/country/afghanistan/climate-data-historical
2

Oct

Second season harvest
(rice & maize)

Jan

3

Afghanistan seasonal calendar (based on FEWSNET)

2. Coordination Arrangements
An AA Group, constituted following an invitation to interested partners through the HCT and comprising FAO, IOM, OCHA,
UNFPA, UNICEF, UN Women, and WFP, has been leading the process. The Group also comprises and is supported by
technical working groups of the Inter Cluster Coordination Team (ICCT) – Accountability to Affected Populations (AAP),
Gender in Humanitarian Action (GiHA), Cash Working Group (CWG) – and sub-national coordination leads – Operational
Coordination Teams (OCT) + Regional ICCGs in the Northern and North-Eastern regions. A dedicated Trigger Sub-Group
was also stood up to refine trigger threshold and timing parameters. The AAP Working Group and UNFPA (on behalf of the
AA Group) coordinate early warning messaging and community engagement, aligning sector- and partner-specific
communication channels. UNICEF will leverage its extensive experience and geographical presence to focus on timely
integration of WASH elements. The CWG advises on aligning cash-based interventions, standardising transfer values and
reducing duplication while ensuring complementarity with ongoing CVA interventions. WFP with support by UNICEF and
UN Women leads a collaborative MPCA approach through shared registration systems (where possible) and streamlined
targeting criteria in addition to support on profiling target populations to identify Women Headed Households and Persons
with Disabilities to ensure proportionate inclusion. FAO, on behalf of the AA Group, conducts ground truthing to verify
drought triggers and monitors data while also leading a livelihoods-focused impact evaluation including multi-sector
indicators. UN Women, leveraging its gender technical expertise and extensive evidence base on gender equality and
women’s empowerment in the context of Afghanistan, supports gender mainstreaming across the AA framework, including
through the GiHA WG. Going forward, the AA Group shall be converted into an AA Community of Practice for Afghanistan
open to all organisations engaged in AA in country and with rotating co-chairs.
Synergies with other initiatives
This framework aligns with the Afghanistan National Disaster Management Authority (ANDMA) 2025-2029 strategic plan
for disaster management with identifies key hazards – including drought, the third most significant, which inflicts an
estimated $280 million in annual losses. This plan highlights preparedness measures, priorities, and resources, recognising
OCHA and UN partners as strategic collaborators. In parallel, this AA framework coordinates with other anticipatory action
initiatives currently under development such as those by the Afghan Red Crescent Society, IRC, Afghanaid and World
Vision. Collaboration with the World Bank is underway to further harmonize drought monitoring, including the AA triggers.
Joint AA orientations have already been conducted with OCHA, partners, IFRC, in addition to engaging and raising
awareness with relevant authorities at national and sub-national level.

3. Triggers and Thresholds
The trigger mechanism is divided into two main monitoring windows: 1. Pre-Season, 2. Mid-Season. It uses a combination
of environmental metrics, seasonal rainfall forecast, observed rainfall, snow cover and vegetative health metrics with the
threshold set based on historical analysis and estimated return periods.

Triggers and thresholds
The financing and activities included in this framework will be activated by the triggers outlined in the table below.

Window

Indicator

Data Source

Evaluation time

Province-level
return period
threshold

4

Window A (forecastbased)
Window B
(observation- and
forecast-based)

Forecasted
precipitation for MarApr-May
Composite drought
indicator (composition
outlined in table
below)

ECMWF SEAS53

Early February

4.2 years4

Multiple

Early April

5.2 years5

For each window, the trigger is activated if the current value of the indicator is more extreme than the level corresponding
to the province-level return period threshold6, any of the three provinces (Faryab, Sar-e-Pul, Takhar)7, Badakhshan will also
be included in the response on a no-regrets basis but is not monitored.
For window B, the composite drought indicator is composed of the individual indicators in the table below. The individual
indicators are combined8 using weights that were selected to optimize the trigger’s accuracy.
Indicator
Agricultural Stress Index (ASI)
Vegetation Health Index (VHI)
Combined observed and
forecasted precipitation
Snow cover
Accumulated seasonal
precipitation
1-metre soil moisture

Data Source

Value used

Weight

9

End of March (Dekad 3)

25%

10

FAO
ECMWF (ERA511 and
SEAS5)
ECMWF ERA5-LAND

End of March (Dekad 3)
Observation: March
Forecast: April-May (issued April)
March

25%

ECMWF ERA5

Total over Jan-Feb-Mar

5%

ECMWF ERA5

End of March

5%

FAO

25%
15%

The combined observed and forecasted precipitation indicator includes observed March precipitation (ERA5) and
forecasted precipitation (SEAS5) for April and May published in April. All monthly values were normalized to z-score and
then averaged together. The return period values for all indicators in both windows are based on the reference period of
1984-2024 (inclusive).
All raster indicators in both windows are aggregated as the mean over the province.
Trigger activation protocol
Pre-defining the activation protocol is critical in order to avoid delays, miscommunication, uncertainty or errors once the
trigger threshold is reached. For the Afghanistan drought AA framework, OCHA’s Centre for Humanitarian Data (CHD) will
monitor the indicators for both windows (forecast and observational indicators). The monitored data/results (whether trigger
thresholds are crossed or not crossed) will be validated dwith the ‘Triggers Sub-Group’, which is led by FAO. The trigger
sub-group either confirms or disputes the finding of the CHD’s analysis of monitored trigger thresholds (trigger threshold
reached “yes/no”) within 48 to 72 hours. This is done supported via a ground-truthing12 exercise undertaken by the trigger
sub-group. If the ground truthing disagrees with the forecast analysis by CHD, further discussion will take place at the AA

3

High-resolution SEAS5 data is shared with CHD directly by ECMWF. A slightly lower-resolution product is available publicly at
https://cds.climate.copernicus.eu/datasets/seasonal-monthly-single-levels
4
A 4.2-year return period corresponds to 10 out of 41 historical years triggering in each province
5
A 5.2-year return period corresponds to 8 out of 41 historical years triggering in each province.
6
Note that the “province-level return period threshold” for each window is higher than the return period of each window outlined in the Executive
Summary. This is because the window as a whole will, by definition, activate at least as frequently as any one of the provinces, since only a single
province has to meet the threshold for the window to activate.
7
For example, if the current value of Window A is 100mm in a certain province, and the value that corresponds to a 4.2-year return period in that
province is 120mm, we would trigger, since this value is more extreme than the return period value (these values are fabricated for the example).
8
Specifically, the indicators were combined by taking the Z-score of each indicator (reversed where relevant, so that a high value always corresponds to
poor agricultural conditions), then combining them using a weighted average using the corresponding weights. The optimal weig hts were determined by
iterating over all possible weight combinations at 5% intervals.
9

Data available publicly at: https://www.fao.org/giews/earthobservation/asis/data/country/AFG/MAP_ASI/DATA/ASI_Dekad_Season1_data.csv

10

Data available publicly at:
https://www.fao.org/giews/earthobservation/asis/data/country/AFG/MAP_NDVI_ANOMALY/DATA/vhi_adm1_dekad_data.csv
11

Data available publicly at: https://cds.climate.copernicus.eu/datasets/reanalysis-era5-land-monthly-means
Ground truthing will be conducted in some or all of the second-tier prioritised districts across Takhar, Badakhshan, Faryab, and Sar-e-Pul, based on
trigger results. It will verify key drought indicators for both activation windows, combining observational data with community input to guide response
decisions. If needed, structured and semi-structured questionnaires will be used to gather insights from farmers, herders, community leaders, water
managers, and field officers. In case of time crunch and if several other outside sources confirm the trigger results, a lighter approach may be applied.
12

5

Group to evaluate the results in relation to humanitarian conditions and in case there’s still disagreement, the final decision
can be deferred to the RC/HC.
Once ‘trigger threshold reached’ is validated by FAO on behalf of the trigger sub-group, CHD informs the Humanitarian
Coordinator, OCHA Afghanistan, the Afghanistan AA Group, CERF and the AHF via email. The HC will inform the HCT of
the activation. OCHA Afghanistan will organise the finalisation of the final-tier geographic prioritisation (if not done already)
with UN and NGO partners and inform the ICCT and ANDMA of the activation. Immediately following the CHD’s notification
of trigger thresholds reached, the CERF (based on ERC pre-approved projects) and AHF will send project approval letters
to partners and disburse funding.

4. Geographical Prioritisation
The geographical prioritisation for the AA framework followed a three-tiered approach:
a) Provincial Prioritisation:
Considering historical trends, a significant number of provinces in Afghanistan – spanning an arch from the western to
northern and northeastern regions – have been affected by droughts. The AA Group conducted an analysis to
determine priority provinces, factoring in:
• Areas with high percentages of rain-fed agricultural land (compared to irrigated land), as rain-fed agriculture is more
vulnerable to droughts.
• Average yearly rainfall anomalies (2020–2023) to identify provinces already impacted by prolonged multi-year
drought conditions, assuming these areas are still recovering from past drought effects.
• Underlying vulnerability in the form of food insecurity, based on IPC data, particularly focusing on provinces with
high percentages of IPC3+ caseloads.
Based on this analysis and consultations with regional Inter-Cluster Coordination Groups, four priority
provinces emerged: Faryab and Sar-e-Pul (Northern Region) and Takhar and Badakhshan (Northeastern Region).
District Prioritisation:
Given the large geographical coverage of these four provinces, a further district-level prioritisation was conducted. OCHA,
using data provided by REACH and the Assessment and Analysis Working Group, developed a long list of prioritised
districts based on indicators such as food insufficiency, hunger levels, livelihood coping mechanisms, water insufficiency,
agriculture, and livestock. Additionally:
•
•

Urban areas and districts with less than 30 per cent rain-fed agricultural land were filtered out.
The initial long list was shared with regional OCHA
offices for refinement and validation based on
ground realities and discussions with partners.

The list of 31 prioritised districts includes:
•
•
•
•

Nine (9) districts in Badakhshan
Eleven (11) districts in Takhar
Five (5) districts in Sar-e-Pul
Six (6) districts in Faryab

b) Final triaging of districts in the event of trigger
activation

6

In the event of trigger activation, monitoring data on current meteorological and hydrological conditions, along with the
latest vulnerability data, presented as a combined index, will be used to identify the 10-20 most vulnerable districts
where anticipatory actions will be implemented. Where adequate data is provided, the composite can take into account
relevant vulnerability data, including food insecurity, nutrition, agriculture and livelihoods, health, and access to water,
depending on the availability of updated and disaggregated datasets.
Household-level Targeting
AA Group partners agreed on coordinated, transparent vulnerability indicators for household-level targeting, along with clear
geographic delineation, deduplication, and coordination measures. For the CERF-funded MPCA component, partners have
geographically delineated as follows: WFP will cover Badakhshan province and, jointly with UN Women, Faryab and Sare-Pul. UNICEF will cover Takhar province. The MPCA targeting framework drew on WFP’s targeting approach and existing
population profiling as a common foundation. UN Women and UNICEF refined their respective targeting approaches to
align with their programmatic priorities, ensuring that the most vulnerable households are effectively reached. The resulting
cash targeting framework was then compared with FAO’s cash+ packages to minimise potential overlaps at the household
level based on livestock holding criteria. Deduplication across the framework’s activities and modalities – including sectoral,
multisectoral, and Cash+ packages – was carefully considered along the following dimensions: pre-defined inclusion and
exclusion criteria, distinct intended cash utilisation, geographic delineation; and package provision timelines, resulting in
mutually exclusive targeting of affected populations by different partners in distinct locations or in adjusted complimentary
packages. Partners also established internal operational considerations for joint assessments, registration and distribution
where possible including exploring signing of data sharing agreements (where feasible) and separately agreed on external
collaboration with local authorities. As a next step, they will detail the community and engagement of communities and
authorities as well as messaging processes.
Female Participation, Gender and Disability Inclusion
The GiHA WG will support ensuring that all activities under the AA Framework are gender-responsive, with women’s
participation mainstreamed as a key component of every intervention. This includes providing direct technical advice to
partners involved in the framework to ensure the gender-responsiveness of their activities. UN Women, as the co-chair of
the GiHA WG and an AA implementing partner, will also coordinate with others under the AA Framework to ensure women
and girls have access to anticipatory action. For example, UN Women will work with UNICEF on water distribution locations
and support women’s organisations and groups in managing water distribution points. Moreover, women’s groups and
women-led organisations will be involved in both the implementation and monitoring of interventions throughout the AA
Framework.
UN Women interventions will be carried out in collaboration with women-led organisations, reflecting UN Women’s principle
of providing assistance “by women, for women” in Afghanistan. Pre-activation orientation will be conducted with women-led
organisations and women’s groups to ensure they understand the objectives of anticipatory action and can share this
knowledge within their communities, further strengthening women’s awareness and mitigating the impact of droughts. This
pre-activation will take place before the trigger start, over an estimated period of up to eight weeks.
Inclusive and Adapted MPCA: In accordance with CWG minimum expenditure basket (MEB) guidance, which
recommends a 15 per cent inclusion quota for women-headed households and 15 per cent quota for households with at
least one person with a disability, framework partners delivering MPCA will apply a 20 per cent top-up to the standard
transfer value for these groups. This measure aims to ensure that the cash assistance provided contributes to overcoming
barriers that may otherwise hinder their access and meaningful participation.

5. Planned Activities
Selection criteria
Anticipatory actions aim to protect those most at risk before a shock hits / peaks. Actions selected followed these criteria:
•

Anticipatory character: Activities effectively prevent or reduce the humanitarian impact of drought.

•

Feasible within the window of opportunity: activities can be delivered within the lead time – i.e. between the trigger
and peak of drought impact.

•

Operational capacity: Partners have the necessary institutional (thematic, logistic, administrative, financial, human
resources) capacity to implement these activities at scale within the lead time.

•

No regrets approach: In case of a false alarm, proposed actions benefit (and not negatively affect) people targeted.

Objectives
The pre-agreed activities aim to mitigate the main humanitarian impacts of drought. They focus on:
•
•
•
•
•

Enabling communities to take informed decisions
Safeguarding agricultural production and reducing yield losses
Avoiding deteriorating food security until harvest
Sustaining animals to protect household livelihoods and avoid deterioration of malnutrition
Ensuring availability of safe water for human and animal consumption

7

•
•
•

Reducing the risk of disease outbreaks
Reducing morbidity and mortality through access to essential goods and services
Mitigating drought-related protection risks and use of negative coping strategies

Activities
The pre-agreed activities are:
•

•

•

•

Communicating risks, engaging with communities, and early warning messaging: This includes early warning
messaging, community sensitisation on disease outbreaks and hygiene promotion through targeted communication
materials, engagement sessions, and household visits. The AAP Working Group is supporting this drought AA
framework and partners to coordinate and streamline community engagement around drought. First, it is aligning sectorand partner-specific messages so local communities receive consistent, accurate information. Second, it has mapped
over 14 community engagement channels – ranging from house-to-house visits to district-level teams – to ensure
coverage of diverse population groups (including women, girls, and persons with disabilities). Third, the group is
deploying its own resources (e.g., communication materials, technical guidance) to bolster outreach in each targeted
district. Finally, it has formed a dedicated AA Community Engagement Task Team to oversee this process, gather
feedback, and refine messaging including on people’s intended cash utilisation based on evolving needs and insights
from the field.
Providing in-kind assistance: A set of in-kind assistance activities such as the provision of food packages, emergency
medical supplies (including cholera kits, severe acute malnutrition-SAM kits, reproductive health kits), nutrient-rich
foods and therapeutic foods for malnutrition prevention and treatment, hygiene kits (soap, water purification tablets,
menstrual hygiene products), safe water storage supplies, and rehabilitation of water infrastructure (water points, water
harvesting structures, boreholes, pumps, wells, storage tanks).
Providing sectoral cash, multi-sectoral cash and integrated mixed modalities (cash+): cash for food, cash for
protection, cash for work (water conservation – rehabilitation), cash + livestock protection package, cash + droughtresistant seeds package and MPCA. Women headed households and households with at least one member with a
disability who are assessed as eligible for MPCA will receive a 20 per cent top-up in addition to the standard transfer
value. Note: Framework partners affirmed their alignment to cluster guidelines for sectoral cash and CWG guidance for
MPCA and its entailed complementarity considerations.
Facilitating access to services: The framework supports access to health services via deployment of mobile health
clinics and teams for maternal, child, and general healthcare; maternal health and obstetric referrals; mental health and
psychosocial support; screening and referral for severe/moderate malnutrition; water testing and treatment; case
management and referral for protection services (including gender-based violence-GBV, child protection); safe spaces;
and infection prevention and disease surveillance services.
CERF partners are ramping up preparedness activities, particularly for WASH. They are mobilising their own resources,
coordinating with local authorities to conduct water supply and gap assessments, prioritising villages, and performing
technical/hydrogeological evaluations for new water sites. Regular monitoring of water levels, quality, community
access, pricing, and WASH-related diseases is in place. If drought conditions worsen sooner than expected, UNICEF
is ready to deploy short-term water trucking from its own resources. It will also distribute hygiene kits from existing
stocks to families planned for MPCA.

Implementation timeline
Jan
Rainy season

Feb

Winter

Mar

Apr

May

Jun

Jul

Aug

Spring

Sep

Oct

Nov

Dec

Jan

Winter

Peak drought impact
Trigger moments
Window A implementation
Window B implementation

A

B
delivery of assistance
delivery of assistance

The tables below summarise CERF and AHF-funded activities. Detailed budgets and numbers of targeted people can
be found in the CERF Projects, AHF Allocation Strategy, and related proposals. All activities identified are critical and
align with the lifesaving criteria of the 2025 HNRP reprioritisation (Strategic objective 1) as well as CERF/AHF’s
lifesaving focus.

8

CERF Funded Activities
Sector
Crosscutting
Food
Security
MultiSector
Agriculture
and
Livelihoods

Partner

Funding
Envelope13

UNFPA, All
WFP

$2.7m

FAO
$2.6m

UNICEF
WASH

Planned
reach

$3.2m

Cash for food & in-kind food assistance
MPCA including top-ups for women-headed households
(WHH) and people with disabilities (PwD)
Cash + livestock protection (animal feed, deworming,
vaccination, etc.) cash can be used for locally available hay
to make up for lack of fresh grazing)
Cash + seeds
Cash for work (water conservation - rehabilitation)
Rehabilitation of water conservation structures
Construction/rehabilitation of climate resilient water supply
systems
Provision of water treatment system (reverse osmosis) +
hygiene awareness on safe drinking water, storage and
use, water conservation and reuse

59,000
people
59,000
people
1,600HHs (A)
2,000HH (B)

Window A

1700 HHs
1,617 HHs
11 structures

Window A
Window A
Window B

29,000
people (A)
36,000
people (B)

UNICEF
MultiSector
UNFPA

Protection

UNFPA
UNFPA
UNFPA
UN Women

$1m

$0.5m
MultiSector

13

UN Women

MPCA including top-ups for WHH and PwD

2,600 HHs

Dignity kits (women of reproductive age)
Menstrual hygiene management kits
Clean delivery kits (pregnant women)
Mobile Health Teams (will deliver the kits) including med
supplies
Safe Spaces
Protection referrals, mental health and psycho-social
support (MHPSS)

3,625
2,400
1,825

MPCA including top-up for WHH
Gender mainstreaming and technical support

Window

Window A + B

Early Warning messaging

WFP

FAO
FAO
FAO
UNICEF

Activity

53,000

Window B
Window A + B

Window A + B

Window B
Window B
Window B
Window B
Window B
Window B

780 HHs
940 HHs

CERF Funding envelopes by agency include EW messages, ground truthing, and other related enabling and operating costs

Window B
Window A + B

9

AHF Funded Activities
Sector

Partner14

Health

Indicative
Funding15

$4m

$2m

Nutrition

$2.5m
WASH

$0.5m

Protection

Multi-Sector
/MPCA

$1m

Phase/Window

Activity
- Mobile health clinics
- Pre-positioned medicines (e.g., for dehydration, respiratory infections,
vector-borne diseases)
- Maternal & child health services (incl. reproductive health kits)
- MHPSS & community sensitization
- Infection prevention & disease surveillance
- Free referral for obstetrical complications
- Mobile Health & Nutrition Teams for screening & treatment of acute
malnutrition
- Counseling & community awareness on maternal, infant and young
child nutrition (MIYCN)
- Monitoring of Breast Milk Substitutes & code adherence
- Transportation support to Therapeutic Feeding Units
- Emergency water supply (rehabilitation/installation of wells, boreholes,
storage tanks)
- Safe water storage & household-level water treatment
- Water conservation (rainwater harvesting, groundwater recharge)
- Distribution of hygiene kits (soap, purification tablets, menstrual
products)
- Sanitation & hygiene promotion
- Case management (GBV, child protection, general protection)
- Cash for protection for high-risk individuals
- Distribution of dignity kits
- Civil documentation for women returnees & female-headed households
- Referral to essential services
- Single tranche MPCA cash distribution aligned with CWG Minimum
Expenditure Basket including top-ups for WHH and PwD

Window B

Window B

Window B

Window B

Window B

6. Pre-agreed Financing
Central Emergency Response Fund (CERF)
For this anticipatory action framework in Afghanistan, the ERC has pre-agreed to allocate up to $10 million from the Central
Emergency Response Fund (CERF) if triggers are reached.
CERF will disburse funds per window once three conditions are met:

•
•
•

Endorsement by the Humanitarian Coordinator of the framework and the CERF application package, including
agency project proposals and budgets and
Endorsement by the Emergency Relief Coordinator of the finalised framework, as well as the CERF agency
project proposals and budgets; and
Activation of the pre-agreed triggers once the framework is fully approved and operational until end 2026.

CERF will disburse funds on a no-regrets basis as soon as the respective trigger is reached. Upon activation of any trigger,
CERF will send out approval letters to the relevant agencies and subsequently will disburse all the funds for the respective
window16. There are separate CERF projects and budgets by window (A and B). Even if Window A does not trigger, funds
cannot be transferred from Window A to Window B, or vice versa. If either window does not trigger (or neither), funds remain
pre-arranged for the following year (up until the end of the 2-year validity period of the framework).
Funding scenarios:

Scenario 1
Scenario 2
Scenario 3

Activation
Triggers reached in
February and April
Trigger reached only in
February
Trigger reached only in
April

Planned activities
Agriculture, Food, MPCA, Health, Nutrition,
Protection, WASH + Early Warning
Agriculture, Food, WASH + Early Warning
Agriculture, Food, MPCA, Health, Nutrition,
Protection, WASH + Early Warning

Budget
$10m CERF + $10m
AHF
Window A CERF
($3.4m)
Window B CERF
($6.6m) + $10m AHF

AHF partner selection will be finally confirmed after the Advisory Board’s review and approval of the AA Allocation Strategy and review committee’s
evaluations of project proposals; the framework document will be updated accordingly.
15
AHF funding envelopes are indicative and will also only be final after the above.
16
While approval letters will be sent out immediately following an activation, the administrative transfer of funds to agencies may be delayed by a few
days. To avoid a delay in project implementation, agencies confirm their ability to frontload the resources required to initiate their response until the funding
has been received.
14

10

Further details can be found in the CERF project documents and CERF communications. Any changes to the projects and
budgets have to be approved by the CERF Secretariat as per usual practice.
Having an anticipatory action framework supported by CERF neither precludes (nor guarantees) additional CERF Rapid
Response funding to a country for the same or other shocks.
Afghanistan Humanitarian Fund (AHF)
The AHF is pioneering an anticipatory approach for drought, complementing CERF’s focus across both Windows A and B
by concentrating on activities that would be triggered under Window B and prioritising Health and Nutrition, with additional
WASH and protection support, including MPCA. The allocation aims for equal distribution between national and international
NGOs, pending partner suitability, and advances localisation. Funding is triggered only when pre-agreed thresholds are
exceeded; if not triggered, project proposals remain in the grant management system for potential funding in the following
year.
To identify suitable partners, 32 Expressions of Interest (EoIs) (16 from national NGOs and 11 from INGOs) were reviewed
based on compliance status, alignment with cluster outcomes, geographic focus, drought anticipatory action relevance,
operational capacity, and a 6-month project timeline (targeting June-August for assistance). Additional preference was given
to Health and Nutrition projects, WASH with proven rapid implementation capacity, and integrated protection. Following the
planned Advisory Board’s review of the proposed AA Allocation Strategy, a ‘review committee’ will approve final proposals
and funding disbursement only if the April trigger is activated. Indicative cluster funding envelopes are Health ($4M),
Nutrition ($2M), WASH ($2.5M), Protection ($0.5M), and MPCA ($1M), subject to technical review and complementarity
with CERF allocations.
All priority activities supported by the AHF under this framework align with the Afghanistan 2025 Humanitarian Needs and
Response Plan. Using clear vulnerability criteria, partners ensure targeted support to the most vulnerable women, men,
girls, and boys through a gender- and disability-inclusive approach. The AHF continues advancing cross-cutting areas to
enhance the quality of projects it funds e.g., through mainstreaming Protection, Gender-based Violence (GBV), Gender &
Age markers, Prevention of Sexual Exploitation and Abuse (PSEA), Accountability to Affected People (AAP), Disability
Inclusion, and Cash-Based interventions, and enhanced humanitarian access throughout project design and
implementation.

Learning, Monitoring and evaluation
This framework offers significant opportunities to both generate and apply learning, thus contributing to the overall
improvement of humanitarian action in response to slow-onset shocks.
Each agency will use its existing monitoring & evaluation systems to collect and track data on implementation progress and
outputs achieved. All findings will be shared. In addition, partners have agreed to conduct a joint Post Distribution Monitoring
(PDM) in case of a framework activation. All UN agencies receiving CERF funding agreed to share data on targeted people,
within existing regulations, and commit to providing relevant inputs to support the PDM. The final PDM report along with
data will be made available to all framework partners. The PDM will be done in close coordination and communication with
participating agencies. Furthermore, FAO will undertake an impact evaluation primarily for livelihoods but with multi-sectoral
observations on behalf of other participating partners. The findings will be shared with all stakeholders involved.
An after-action review will further be conducted to gather lessons learned from the development and potential
implementation of the framework. Partners have also planned a broader / coordinated impact evaluation in 2026. This will
either follow the planned impact evaluation by FAO on behalf of AA implementing partners in 2025 or discussions could
take place for an independent evaluation in 2026.

7. Validity and future of the framework
The present framework is valid for an initial period of about two years following endorsement of the ERC (2025-2026). The
2025 season will be a pilot phase given that it constitutes the first inter-agency anticipatory action experience in Afghanistan.
In the subsequent 2026 season, lessons learned from both the development and potential implementation of the framework
will be applied to enhance and increase the scope of the current framework in collaboration with the anticipatory action
group.

11

8. Annexes
Core principles
Each anticipatory action framework is tailored to the local context. OCHA has identified nine core principles that should
apply to the framework in Afghanistan:
•

Prioritizing a multi-sectoral approach: Partners should prioritise multi-sectoral, co-targeted interventions, when
possible, to maximise synergies and to achieve great impact.

•

Ensuring the centrality of protection: In line with the IASC centrality of protection policy, and the principle of
“leaving no one behind” (2030 Agenda), all partners implementing anticipatory interventions have the responsibility
to ensure that their response will not aggravate the exposure of communities to risks of violence, insecurity,
extortion and exploitation. Anticipatory actions must also ensure that they benefit all communities (local
communities, displaced communities, returnees, and refugees) based on their needs, with due attention given to
obstacles linked to gender, age, disability or social affiliation.

•

Ensuring gender equality is central to inclusive and accountable anticipatory action: In line with IASC Policy
on Gender Equality and the Empowerment of Women and Girls in Humanitarian Action, all partners are responsible
and accountable to ensure humanitarian action, including anticipatory action is: rights-based; recognises genderbased and intersectional needs, as well as potential gender-based discrimination in access to resources and
services; facilitate leadership and contribution of crisis-affected women and girls in the planning, implementation,
monitoring and evaluation of anticipatory actions and early response, that directly impact their lives and those of
their dependents and wider communities.

•

Promoting accountability to affected populations and the Protection from Sexual Exploitation and Abuse
(PSEA): Partners engaged in the implementation of the anticipatory action framework are responsible for the
integration of accountability to affected populations approaches in their activities. This includes making all efforts to
solicit, hear, and act upon the voices and priorities of affected people (including the most marginalised and at-risk
women, men, girls and boys) in a coordinated manner, before, during, and after anticipatory action. It also means
ensuring that community feedback leads to corrective action in future anticipatory action.

•

Supporting localisation: All partners involved in the implementation of this framework are expected to honor the
HCT’s commitment towards localisation. Equitable partnerships with local actors building upon their long-term
relationships and trust with communities during anticipatory action are crucial.

•

Engaging in partnerships: Collaboration across humanitarian actors is key to ensuring that all sectors are
engaged, and that assistance is mobilised according to the AA framework.

•

Generating development and climate adaptation co-benefits: Pilot participants are encouraged to consider how
financing for anticipatory action can complement financing for development by reducing suffering and addressing
the root causes of problems while supporting adaptation to climate change.

•

Capturing learning: Monitoring, evaluation and learning activities should be embedded at every phase of the
development and implementation of the AA framework.

•

Striving for integration: The framework seeks to integrate the anticipatory action activities into the existing
humanitarian architecture and to foster linkages with long term programming, including resilience and development
initiatives.

12

Contact list
Agency

Name

Role

Email

UNICEF

Shivanarain Singh

WASH Specialist

ssingh@unicef.org

UNICEF

Blessing Zindi

Emergency Manager

bzindi@unicef.org

UNICEF

Ahmad Seyar Haqmal

WASH Specialist

ahaqmal@unicef.org

UNICEF

Arzi Hussain Akhgar

Social Policy Officer

aakhgar@unicef.org

UNICEF

Adane Bekele

WASH Manager

adbekele@unicef.org

UNICEF

Sarah Huendgen

Partnerships Manager

shuendgen@unicef.org

UNICEF

Nasim Norouzi

Partnership & Reporting Specialist

nnorouzi@unicef.org

UNICEF

Etienne Darveau

Partnership Officer

edarveau@unicef.org

UNICEF

Kenneth Anyanzo

Social Policy Specialist

kanyanzo@unicef.org

UNICEF

Muqadar Shar Hashimi

Social Policy Specialist

shashimi@unicef.org

WFP

Yein Kim
Anusara
Singhkumarwong

Head of Social Protection

yein.kim@wfp.org
anusara.singhkumarwong@wf
p.org

WFP

Jessica Kim

Head of Cash-based Transfers

Jessica.kim@wfp.org

WFP

Pauline Eloff

pauline.eloff@wfp.org

WFP

Moataz El Masry

FAO

Sultani, Roya

Emergency Manager
Programme Policy Officer (Early Warning &
GIS)
AA Specialist

FAO

Devale, Kaustubh

Kaustubh.Devale@fao.org

FAO

Sylvie Montembault

FAO

Jana Ceremniha

Head of Programmes
Head of Monitoring, Analysis and Strategic
Communications
Emergency Manager

UN Women

Anouk Heili

GiHA Coordination and Access Specialist

UN Women

Jessica Walker

GiHA Consultant

UN Women

Ebba Nygren

Programme Analyst

anouk.heili@unwomen.org
Jessicakatrine.walker@unwom
en.org
Ebba.nygren@unwomen.org

UNFPA

Ana Maria Leal

Humanitarian Coordinator

leal@unfpa.org

UNFPA

Husni Husni

AAP Specialist

husni@unfpa.org

UNFPA

Hazrat Amin

Humanitarian Access Officer

haamin@unfpa.org

Pascal Pillokeit

Humanitarian Affairs Officer

pascal.pillokeit@un.org

WFP

OCHA
AFG/SCU
OCHA
AFG/SCU
OCHA
AFG/AHF
OCHA
AFG/IMU
OCHA
AFG/FCAU
OCHA
AFG/FCAU
OCHA
AFG/FCAU
OCHA
AFG/FCAU
OCHA
HQ/HFSA
OCHA CHD

Rami Beirkdar
Serin Hetou

Head of Resilience & Food Systems

Humanitarian Affairs Officer – cash
coordination
Humanitarian Affairs Officer / Programme &
Data Management Lead

moataz.elmasry@wfp.org
roya.sultani@fao.org

Sylvie.Montembault@fao.org
jana.ceremniha@fao.org

mohammed.beirkdar@un.org
hetou@un.org

Sandeep Bashyal

Information Management Officer

bashyal@un.org

Nova Ratnanto

Chair of R-ICCG NR

ratnanto@un.org

Maria Rodriguez

Chair of R-ICCG NER

maria.vinuelarodriguez@un.or
g

Shahim Taher

Humanitarian Affairs Officer / NR

shahimt@un.org

Babrak Osman

Humanitarian Affairs Officer / NER

babrak@un.org

Billie Getachew

Humanitarian Affairs Officer

getachewalemayehu@un.org

Zachary Arno

Data Scientist

zachary.arno@un.org

OCHA CERF

Yakubu Alhassan

Humanitarian Affairs Officer

yakubu.alhassan@un.org

OCHA CERF

Regina Omlor

CERF AA Lead

regina.omlor@un.org

13

OCHA CERF

Nico Rost

CERF Head of Unit

rostn@un.org

OCHA ROAP

Maya Manocsoc

Humanitarian Affairs Officer

maya.manocsoc@un.org

