Anticipatory Action Framework
Afghanistan - Drought
March 2026
Approved by the RC/HC on 17 March 2026
Endorsed by the ERC on 04 April 2026

Executive Summary
2025 was a pilot phase for the first coordinated anticipatory action (AA) framework in Afghanistan. Following the activation
of the second window (Window B) in April 2025 and the subsequent implementation of activities, partners under the AA
Framework for drought in Afghanistan convened an After-Action Review workshop in early 2026 (which reviewed evidence
from the CERF-AHF and WFP after action review exercises). The workshop identified and discussed lessons learnt and
actions for improvement ahead of the spring season. This updated framework reflects the resulting changes and collective
agreements reached by AA partners and priorities of the Humanitarian Reset.
This document presents the framework for drought anticipatory action in Afghanistan. It entails coordinated packages of
assistance planned to be delivered to people at risk of spring drought in Afghanistan across five prioritised spring rain and
grain dependent provinces – Balkh, Faryab, Jawzjan, Sar-e-Pul, and Badghis. The framework was developed through a
participatory process of humanitarian partners who formed an Anticipatory Action Group, coordinated by OCHA, under the
overall leadership of the Deputy Special Representative of the Secretary-General/Resident Coordinator/Humanitarian
Coordinator (DSRSG/RC/HC).
The financing
The Emergency Relief Coordinator has approved $22 million combining pre-committed financing by the Central Emergency
Response Fund (CERF) ($12 million) and the Afghanistan Humanitarian Fund (AHF) ($10 million) – with this being one of
two AA frameworks globally that has been backed by both pooled funds. Payout of these funds will only occur if the preagreed trigger thresholds are reached. The funding will allow humanitarian partners to provide multi-purpose cash ($11m)
and in-kind and cash-based assistance across Agriculture and Livelihoods ($4.25m), Health and Nutrition($3.65m),
Protection ($0.87m), and WASH ($2.19m) sectors.
The trigger
The financing and activities included in this framework will be triggered by either the following:
•
•

Forecast-based trigger (window A): If the March European Centre for Medium-Range Weather Forecasts (ECMWF)
predicts March-May rainfall below a 1-in-6-year RP based threshold in the monitored area.
Observation and forecast-based trigger (window B): If the composite indicator monitored in April is breaches the 1 in 4
year return period threshold, in the monitored area. (details are in the trigger section below)

The combined overall return period for the full allocation is 1-in 4 years., a Historical activation details for the framework are
shown in the table below1.

1

Budget-related figures only include the CERF budget.
The “overall return period” corresponds to years where at least one of the windows activates.
The “average period for total budget spend” is the average period for the whole CERF framework budget ($10M) to be spent on framework activations

2

The action plan
The framework will enable humanitarian partners to implement anticipatory activities in a coordinated manner. In line with
the humanitarian reset, this revised framework advances multi-purpose cash assistance (MPCA) - preferred by people –
and focuses on the most vulnerable – inter-sector severity 4 areas and populations in line with the hyper-prioritised 2026
Humanitarian Needs and Response Plan (HNRP). Activities covered by both CERF and AHF funding will be delivered either
after the first trigger moment in March or the second trigger moment in April, with a large focus on MPCA (50%) and across
livelihoods, WASH, nutrition, protection and Health sectors.
To promote choice and dignity among beneficiaries, and in response to feedback gathered through Afghanistan’s
Community Voices and Accountability Platform highlighting the affected people’s strong preference for cash assistance,
both CERF- and AHF-funded activities include MPCA and sectoral cash assistance. CERF funding will be made available
to UN agencies while the AHF funding will exclusively cover national and international NGO partners. CERF and AHF have
been deployed as complementary pooled funding mechanisms where comparative advantages of NGO and UN partners
were maximised. For instance, under the nutrition sector, CERF financing will cover the provision of essential nutrition
commodities and health supplies, while AHF funds international and national NGO partners to deliver and implement the
corresponding activities, including the provision of RUTF, BSFP, and sexual and reproductive health services through
mobile health teams. All activities identified are critical and align with the lifesaving criteria of the 2026 HNRP (Strategic
objective 1) as well as CERF/AHF’s lifesaving focus.
All activities under the framework will be implemented, if the trigger thresholds for the cluster of five provinces is reached.
The pre-agreed actions will focus on the following modalities:
•
•
•
•

Cash and Voucher Assistance: This includes Multi-Purpose Cash Assistance (MPCA) aimed at strengthening
household-level drought preparedness based on self-identified priorities, as well as cash+ and sector-specific cash
modalities for livestock protection and community-level water conversation and rehabilitation.
Communicating risks, engaging with communities, and early warning messaging: early warnings, community
disease prevention and hygiene messaging.
Providing in-kind assistance: including livestock protection inputs, emergency medical, dignity and hygiene supplies,
therapeutic nutrition, and NFIs for safe water storage and household-level water treatment.
Facilitating access to services: through mobile health clinics, maternal health services, nutrition screening, and
referrals for protection needs.

The learning
In 2025, partners undertook two after action reviews (one led by the CERF-AHF and another by WFP) and a coordinated
impact evaluation led by FAO (ongoing at the time of drafting this framework). For 2026, results from the ongoing impact
evaluation will be drawn on.
Validity period
The present framework is valid for an initial period of two years following endorsement of the ERC (2026-2027).

1. Drought in Afghanistan
Afghanistan remains among the most climate-vulnerable countries globally, ranking as the seventh most vulnerable country
to climate shocks per the Notre Dame Global Adaptation Index and fourth in the INFORM Climate Change Risk Index. By
2030, annual droughts may become normal in many areas. Between 2020 and 2025, Afghanistan experienced repeated
droughts, severely impacting coping capacities and drastically reducing groundwater levels, in some cases by up to 30
meters. In 2025, drought severely affected large parts of the northern and western regions, with approximately 3.4 million
people affected in 12 provinces across at least 65 districts, impacting food production, livestock health and rural incomes.
Previous CERF drought allocations for Afghanistan have varied in size, with an average of $12.3 million via the rapid
response window. Funding requests were typically submitted in April-May or August-October periods.
Jan

Feb

Winter wet
season

Mar

Apr

May

Jun

Jul

Aug

Sep

Oct

Spring wet season
Spring wheat
planting

Dec

Winter wet season

Second season
planting

Poppy harvest

Nov

Wheat and barley harvest

Winter wheat planting
Second season harvest
(rice & maize)

Lean season
Peak risk for spring
flooding

Afghanistan seasonal calendar (based on FEWSNET)

Jan

3

2. Coordination Arrangements
An AA Group, initially constituted following an invitation to interested partners through the HCT in late 2024 and comprising
FAO, IOM, OCHA, UNFPA, UNICEF, UN Women, and WFP, has been leading the process. The Group also comprises and
is supported by technical working groups of the Inter Cluster Coordination Team (ICCT) – Accountability to Affected
Populations (AAP), Gender in Humanitarian Action (GiHA), Cash Working Group (CWG) – and sub-national coordination
leads – Operational Coordination Teams (OCT) in the Northern and North-Eastern regions. In 2026, this Group additional
NGO partners who partook in the delivery of the 2025 AA assistance post-activation (via funding from AHF). These partners
contributed to evidence generation through the after-action review to inform the 2026 revision. A dedicated Trigger SubGroup was also stood up in 5 to refine trigger threshold and timing parameters. For 2026, minor changes to the trigger
moments and optimisation to the weighting of the combined drought index (for the April trigger moment) was applied based
on the after action review discussions of the AA Group. The AAP Working Group and UNFPA (on behalf of the AA Group)
coordinate early warning messaging and community engagement, aligning sector- and partner-specific communication
channels. This extensive Community Engagement and Early Warning Tracker will be regularly updated and provides
disaggregated data on the reach of early warning messages by district and population group. The Tracker additionally
provides data on misinformation, challenges encountered during message sharing, and more importantly, feedback
received from communities regarding the messages. The additional pieces of qualitative data will help address the gaps
picked up in early warning messages dissemination in 2025. The CWG advises on aligning cash-based interventions,
standardising transfer values and reducing duplication while ensuring complementarity with ongoing CVA interventions.
WFP leads on MPCA through streamlined targeting criteria in addition to support on profiling target populations to identify
Women Headed Households and Persons with Disabilities to ensure proportionate inclusion. For 2026, WFP has drawn
lessons from the 2025 activation and will apply an improved targeting criteria for MPCA. FAO, on behalf of the AA Group,
conducts ground truthing to supplement drought triggers through a rapid survey on what key informants in relevant provinces
are witnessing.
Synergies with other initiatives
This framework aligns with the Afghanistan National Disaster Management Authority (ANDMA) 2025-2029 strategic plan
for disaster management with identifies key hazards – including drought, the third most significant, which inflicts an
estimated $280 million in annual losses. This plan highlights preparedness measures, priorities, and resources, recognising
OCHA and UN partners as strategic collaborators. In parallel, this coordinated AA framework coordinates with other
anticipatory action initiatives currently under development such as those by the Afghan Red Crescent Society, IRC,
Afghanaid and World Vision. In 2025, Education Cannot Wait made a complementary allocation in AA locations.
Collaboration with the World Bank is underway to explore hosting the trigger model in the World Bank’s Drought Decision
Platform. Joint AA orientations have already been conducted with OCHA, partners, IFRC, in addition to engaging and raising
awareness with relevant authorities at national and sub-national level.

3. Triggers and Thresholds
In early 2026, the AA Group decided to refine the trigger model in line with the revised geographic scope. For 2026, the
trigger will be monitored across the merged cluster of five provinces. A two-stage trigger approach is maintained, with
activation points in March or April. The trigger mechanism uses a combination of environmental metrics, seasonal rainfall
forecast, observed rainfall, snow cover and vegetative health metrics with the threshold set based on historical analysis and
estimated return periods.

Triggers thresholds
The financing and activities included in this framework will be activated by the triggers outlined in the table below.

4

Return period
threshold

Indicator
Data Source
Evaluation time
Forecasted
Window A (forecastEarly March
1 in 6 years3
precipitation for MarECMWF SEAS52
based)
Apr-May
Composite drought
Window B
indicator (composition
(observation- and
Multiple
Early April
1 in 4 years4
outlined in table
forecast-based)
below)
For each window, the trigger activates when the current indicator value exceeds the return period threshold for the merged
five provinces.
Window

Window A threshold is reached in March when the ECMWF SEAS5 forecasts precipitation for MAM to be below 129 mm,
which corresponds to a 1-in-6-year rainfall deficit.
Window B threshold is reached in April when the optimized combined drought indicator (CDI) exceeds the threshold of
0.503, which corresponds to a 1-in-4-year return period.
For window B, the composite drought indicator is composed of the individual indicators in the table below. The individual
indicators are combined5 using weights that were selected to optimize the trigger’s accuracy.
Indicator

Data Source

Agricultural Stress Index (ASI)

Value used

Weight

6

End of March (Dekad 3)

20.6%

7

FAO

Vegetation Health Index (VHI)
Combined observed and
forecasted precipitation
Snow cover

FAO
ECMWF (ERA58 and
SEAS5)
ECMWF ERA5-LAND

End of March (Dekad 3)
Observation: March
Forecast: April-May (issued April)
March

19.2%

1-metre soil moisture

ECMWF ERA5

End of March

12.1%

27.6%

20.5%

The combined observed and forecasted precipitation indicator includes observed March precipitation (ERA5) and
forecasted precipitation (SEAS5) for April and May published in April. All monthly values were normalized to z-score and
then averaged together. The return period value for the windows are based on the analysis period of 1984-2025.. The first
activation (window A or B) releases the full allocation amount. The allocation is not split across window A and B as in the
previous version of the framework. The thresholds/return periods for merged AOI (5 provinces) are shown below:
AOI level

Window A

Window B

Combined RP

AOI (merged)

~1 in 6 year RP

~1 in 4 year RP

~1 in 4 year RP

Trigger activation protocol
Pre-defining the activation protocol is critical in order to avoid delays, miscommunication, uncertainty or errors once the
trigger threshold is reached. For the Afghanistan drought AA framework, OCHA’s Centre for Humanitarian Data (CHD) will
monitor the indicators for both windows (forecast and observational indicators). The monitored data/results (whether trigger
thresholds are reached or not reached) will be communicated to OCHA Afghanistan, the Afghanistan AA Group, CERF and
the AHF via email. In case of activation, FAO will quickly conduct a ground-truthing exercise across the 23 prioritised districts
(see next section 4. Geographical Prioritisation). This exercise will inform the identification of the most vulnerable districts,
complementing monitoring data on current meteorological and hydrological conditions. With this information, OCHA
Afghanistan will promptly organise the finalisation of the final-tier geographic prioritisation (see next section 4. Geographical
Prioritisation) with UN and NGO partners and inform the HC/HCT, the ICCT and ANDMA of the activation.
Immediately following the CHD’s notification of trigger thresholds reached, the CERF (based on ERC pre-approved projects)
and AHF will send project approval letters to partners and disburse funding.

2

High-resolution SEAS5 data is shared with CHD directly by ECMWF. A slightly lower-resolution product is available publicly at
https://cds.climate.copernicus.eu/datasets/seasonal-monthly-single-levels
3
A 4.2-year return period corresponds to 10 out of 41 historical years triggering in each province
4
A 5.2-year return period corresponds to 8 out of 41 historical years triggering in each province.
5
Specifically, the indicators were combined by taking the Z-score of each indicator (reversed where relevant, so that a high value always corresponds to
poor agricultural conditions), then combining them using a weighted average using the corresponding weights. The optimal weig hts were determined by
iterating over all possible weight combinations at 5% intervals.
6
Data available publicly at: https://www.fao.org/giews/earthobservation/asis/data/country/AFG/MAP_ASI/DATA/ASI_Dekad_Season1_data.csv
7
Data available publicly at:
https://www.fao.org/giews/earthobservation/asis/data/country/AFG/MAP_NDVI_ANOMALY/DATA/vhi_adm1_dekad_data.csv
8
Data available publicly at: https://cds.climate.copernicus.eu/datasets/reanalysis-era5-land-monthly-means

5

Activation protocol
When

Who

What

How

Beginning of March or
April

CHD

Monitors indicators for window A / B

ECMWF SEAS5
portal

When trigger threshold is
reached

CHD

Notifies OCHA country office and HQ,
Afghanistan AA Group, CERF and AHF.

Email

OCHA CO

OCHA country office – as HCT secretariat – will
inform HC/HCT of activation.

Email

CERF

Sends out approval letter authorizing agencies to
use all funds.

Email

FAO

Conduct quick ground truthing through field
presence.

Technical field work

OCHA CO,
AAG

Determine final geographical prioritization to
triage the target districts.

Meeting

UN Agencies
and NGOs

Implementation of AA activities per the
framework and approved projects.

Direct
implementation with
partners

Once trigger notification
is received

Once target districts are
selected

AHF

4. Geographical Prioritisation
Note: In a typical drought year in Afghanistan, affected areas span multiple provinces, most commonly in the western,
northern and north-eastern regions, but often also extending to the central, eastern and southern parts of the country. Given
the scale of potential impact, the geographic scope of the drought AA framework for monitoring and implementation
purposes is deliberately limited, reflecting drought risks, underlying vulnerability as well as operational considerations and
available financing. The methodology applied, and the resulting number of prioritised districts, does not necessarily
represent the full extent of drought-affected areas at the time of activation. Rather, it reflects the operational and financial
realities within which the AA Framework operates. With increased capacity and additional resources, it is the intended to
expand the geographic scope accordingly.
The geographical prioritisation for the AA framework follows a three-tiered approach:
a) Provincial Prioritisation:
Considering historical trends, a significant number of provinces in Afghanistan – spanning an arch from the western to
northern and northeastern regions – have been affected by droughts. The AA Group conducted an analysis to
determine priority provinces, factoring in:
• Areas with high percentages of rain-fed agricultural land (compared to irrigated land), as rain-fed agriculture is more
vulnerable to droughts.
• Average yearly rainfall anomalies (2020–2023) and drought impact in 2025 to identify provinces already impacted
by prolonged multi-year drought conditions, assuming these areas are still recovering from past drought effects.
• Provinces that show strong correlation in historical drought events, to identify a coherent cluster of provinces and
reduce outliers.
Based on this analysis and consultations with regional partners, five priority provinces emerged: Balkh, Faryab, Jawzjan
and Sar-e-Pul (Northern Region) and Badghis (Western Region).
b) District Prioritisation:
Given the large geographical coverage of the five provinces, further prioritisation was undertaken at district level. This
was based on underlying vulnerability, reflected in existing inter-sectoral needs using the latest 2026 HNRP data.
Within the five provinces, districts with inter-sectoral severity levels of 4 or above were selected as priority districts.
Prioritizing people in districts with the highest inter-sectoral needs in Afghanistan ensures that those most in need are
reached first, in line with the prioritisation approach of the Global Humanitarian Overview (GHO).

6

The list of 23 prioritised districts include:
•
•
•
•
•

Eleven (11) districts in Faryab
Five (5) districts in Jawzjan
Five (5) districts in Sar-e-Pul
One (1) district in Balkh
One (1) district in Badghis

c) Final triaging of districts in the event of
trigger activation
In the event of trigger activation, monitoring
data on current
meteorological and
hydrological conditions, along with the results
of ground-truthing conducted by FAO, will be
partly used to identify the 10-15 most
vulnerable districts where anticipatory actions
will be implemented. WFP will also share with the AA group its latest improved hotspot monitoring analysis which covers
latest data on vulnerability (across multiple sectoral needs) and access. Where adequate data is provided, the final
triaging of districts can take into account relevant vulnerability data, including food insecurity, nutrition, agriculture and
livelihoods, health, and access to water, depending on the availability of updated and disaggregated datasets.
Household-level Targeting
AA Group partners agreed on coordinated, transparent vulnerability indicators for household-level targeting, along with clear
geographic delineation, deduplication, and coordination measures. For the CERF and AHF-funded MPCA component,
partners will decide on geographic delineation to avoid duplication of interventions. The MPCA targeting framework drew
on WFP’s targeting approach and existing population profiling as a common foundation. The targeting criteria for 2026 were
refined in consultation with UN Women, UNICEF and AHF partners to ensure that the most vulnerable households are
effectively reached. The resulting cash targeting framework was then compared with FAO’s cash+ packages to minimise
potential overlaps at the household level based on livestock holding criteria. Deduplication across the framework’s activities
and modalities – including sectoral, multisectoral, and Cash+ packages – was carefully considered along the following
dimensions: pre-defined inclusion and exclusion criteria, distinct intended cash utilisation, geographic delineation; and
package provision timelines, resulting in mutually exclusive targeting of affected populations by different partners in distinct
locations or in adjusted complimentary packages. Partners also established internal operational considerations for joint
assessments, registration and distribution and separately agreed on external collaboration with local authorities.
Female Participation, Gender and Disability Inclusion
The GiHA WG will support ensuring that all activities under the AA Framework are gender-responsive, with women’s
participation mainstreamed as a key component of every intervention. This includes providing direct technical advice to
partners involved in the framework to ensure the gender-responsiveness of their activities. UN Women, as the co-chair of
the GiHA WG will also coordinate with others under the AA Framework to ensure women and girls have access to
anticipatory action. For example, UN Women is working UNFPA on tailored early warning messaging.
Inclusive and Adapted MPCA: In accordance with CWG minimum expenditure basket (MEB) guidance, which
recommends a 15 per cent inclusion quota for women-headed households and 15 per cent quota for households with at
least one person with a disability, framework partners delivering MPCA will apply a 20 per cent top-up to the standard
transfer value for these groups. This measure aims to ensure that the cash assistance provided contributes to overcoming
barriers that may otherwise hinder their access and meaningful participation.

5. Planned Activities
Selection criteria
Anticipatory actions aim to protect those most at risk before a shock hits/peaks. Actions selected followed these criteria:
•

Anticipatory character: Activities effectively prevent or reduce the humanitarian impact of drought.

•

Feasible within the window of opportunity: activities can be delivered within the lead time – i.e. between the trigger
and peak of drought impact.

•

Operational capacity: Partners have the necessary institutional (thematic, logistic, administrative, financial, human
resources) capacity to implement these activities at scale within the lead time.

•

No regrets approach: In case of a false alarm, proposed actions benefit (and not negatively affect) people targeted.

7

Objectives
The pre-agreed activities aim to mitigate the main humanitarian impacts of drought. They focus on:
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

Enabling communities to take informed decisions
Safeguarding agricultural production and reducing yield losses
Avoiding deteriorating food security until harvest
Sustaining animals to protect household livelihoods and avoid deterioration of malnutrition
Ensuring availability of safe water for human and animal consumption
Reducing the risk of disease outbreaks
Reducing morbidity and mortality through access to essential goods and services
Mitigating drought-related protection risks and use of negative coping strategies

Activities
The pre-agreed activities are:
•

•

•

•

Communicating risks, engaging with communities, and early warning messaging: The Accountability to Affected
Populations Working Group (AAPWG) has worked with partners under this framework to develop contextualized and
sectoral early warning messages, targeted communication materials and identify effective communication channels,
such as face-to-face engagement and radio programmes. The AAPWG is coordinating partners and streamline
community engagement around drought. First, it has developed contextualized sector- and partner-specific messages
so local communities receive consistent, accurate information. Second, it has identified appropriate communication
channels – such as house-to-house visits and radio programmes – to ensure coverage of diverse population groups
(including women, girls, and persons with disabilities). Third, the group is deploying its own resources (e.g.,
communication materials, technical guidance) to bolster outreach in each targeted district. Finally, it has formed a
dedicated AA Community Engagement Task Team to oversee this process, gather feedback, and refine messaging
including on people’s intended cash utilisation based on evolving needs and insights from the field. A dedicated online
dashboard tracks the dissemination of early warning messages to support coordination and provides access to key
messages and related guidance.
Providing in-kind assistance: A set of in-kind assistance activities such as the provision of food packages, emergency
medical supplies (including severe acute malnutrition-SAM kits, reproductive health kits), nutrient-rich foods and
therapeutic foods for malnutrition prevention and treatment, hygiene kits (soap, water purification tablets, menstrual
hygiene products), safe water storage supplies.
Providing sectoral cash, multi-sectoral cash and integrated mixed modalities (cash+): Multipurpose cash
assistance (MPCA) is key component of the framework to provide affected households with the flexibility to prepare in
accordance with their most pressing needs. This is complemented by cash for work (water conservation – rehabilitation)
and cash + livestock protection packages. Women headed households and households with at least one member with
a disability who are assessed as eligible for MPCA will receive a 20 per cent top-up in addition to the standard transfer
value. Note: Framework partners affirmed their alignment to cluster guidelines for sectoral cash and CWG guidance for
MPCA and its entailed complementarity considerations.
Facilitating access to services and replenishment of critical nutrition supplies: The framework supports access
to health services via deployment of mobile health clinics and teams for maternal, child, and general healthcare;
maternal health and obstetric referrals; screening and referral for severe/moderate malnutrition; water testing and
treatment; case management and referral for protection services (including gender-based violence-GBV); and infection
prevention and disease surveillance services. Critical nutrition commodities for the treatment of SAM and high-risk MAM
are replenished to avoid pipeline breaks and ensure that implementing partners are able to provide nutrition services.

Implementation timeline
Jan
Rainy season

Feb

Winter

Mar

Apr

May

Jun

Jul

Aug

Spring

Sep

Oct

Nov

Dec

Jan

Winter

Peak drought impact
Trigger moments
Window A implementation
Window B implementation

A

B
delivery of assistance
delivery of assistance

The tables below summarise CERF and AHF-funded activities. Detailed budgets and numbers of targeted people can
be found in the CERF Projects, AHF Allocation Strategy, and related proposals. All activities identified are critical and
align with the lifesaving criteria of the 2025 HNRP reprioritisation (Strategic objective 1) as well as CERF/AHF’s
lifesaving focus.

8

CERF funded activities
Agency

Sector

FAO

Food
SecurityAgriculture

Protection
UNFPA
HealthSRH

WASH
UNICEF
Nutrition
MPC
WFP

Nutrition

Activities
Cash+ Livestock Protection - PPR vaccines, Dewormer +
CCHF
Cash for work (water conservation - rehabilitation)
Ground Truthing
Early warning messaging and dissemination (SMS)
Distribution of Dignity Kits to Women of Reproductive age
and adolescent girls.
Distribution and Replenishment of MHM kits to adolescent
girls.
Conducting orientation session for health service
providers on PSEA.
Dissemination of early warning messages
Distribution and Replenishment of IEHK for provision of lifesaving services
Distribution and Replenishment of Clean Delivery Kits
Procurement and distribution of water tanks to selected
household
Procurement and distribution of household water treatment
units to the selected families
Conduct hygiene promotion, community mobilization and
distribution of water purification tablets
Distribution of therapeutic supplies (RUTF) to treatment
points in priority districts
Provision of life-saving treatment services to children aged
6 - 59 months affected by SAM
Distribution of MPCA to selected beneficiaries
Procure and dispatch specialized nutrition commodities.
Children aged 6–59 months and PBWGs receive
specialized nutritious foods that treat MAM.

Total

People
Targeted

Budget

85,120

$3,250,000

15,069

$375,000

103,000

$375,000

12,600

$700,000

5,371

$300,000

153,560

$6,020,000

15,555

$980,000
$12,000,000

AHF funded activities
Sector
Health
Nutrition

Partner9

Indicative
Funding10

&
$2m

WASH

Protection
Emergency
Agricuture
Multi-Sector
/MPCA

9

$1.5m

$0.5m
$1m
$5m

- Free referral for obstetrical complications
- Mobile Health & Nutrition Teams for screening & treatment of acute malnutrition
- Counseling & community awareness on maternal, infant and young child nutrition (MIYCN)
- Monitoring of Breast Milk Substitutes & code adherence
- Transportation support to Therapeutic Feeding Units
- Emergency water supply (rehabilitation/installation of wells, boreholes, storage tanks)
- Safe water storage & household-level water treatment
- Water conservation (rainwater harvesting, groundwater recharge)
- Distribution of hygiene kits (soap, purification tablets, menstrual products)
- Sanitation & hygiene promotion
- Case management (GBV, child protection, general protection)
- Cash for protection for high-risk individuals
- Distribution of dignity kits
- Civil documentation for women returnees & female-headed households
- Referral to essential services
- Livestock protection
- Single tranche MPCA cash distribution aligned with CWG Minimum Expenditure Basket
including top-ups for WHH and PwD

AHF partner selection will be finally confirmed after the Advisory Board’s review and approval of the AA Allocation Strategy and review committee’s
evaluations of project proposals; the framework document will be updated accordingly.
10
AHF funding envelopes are indicative and will also only be final after the above.

9

6. Pre-agreed Financing
Central Emergency Response Fund (CERF)
For this anticipatory action framework in Afghanistan, the ERC has pre-agreed to allocate up to $12 million from the Central
Emergency Response Fund (CERF) if triggers are reached.
CERF will disburse funds per window once three conditions are met:

•
•
•

Endorsement by the Humanitarian Coordinator of the framework and the CERF application package, including
agency project proposals and budgets and
Endorsement by the Emergency Relief Coordinator of the finalised framework, as well as the CERF agency
project proposals and budgets; and
Activation of the pre-agreed triggers once the framework is fully approved and operational until end 2026.

CERF will disburse funds on a no-regrets basis as soon as the respective trigger is reached. Upon activation of any trigger,
CERF will send out approval letters to the relevant agencies and subsequently will disburse all the funds for the respective
activation moment11. Further details can be found in the CERF project documents and CERF communications. Any changes
to the projects and budgets have to be approved by the CERF Secretariat as per usual practice.
Having an anticipatory action framework supported by CERF neither precludes (nor guarantees) additional CERF Rapid
Response funding to a country for the same or other shocks.
Afghanistan Humanitarian Fund (AHF)
AHF launches a $10 million allocation under the joint $22 million CERF–AHF Anticipatory Action framework for drought in
2026 (CERF: $12M; AHF: $10M). The allocation aims to:
Mitigate drought impacts before crisis thresholds are reached through trigger-based early financing.
Protect lives, livelihoods and dignity in the most climate-exposed, severity 4+ districts.
Deliver integrated, household-level support, centered on multipurpose cash and early warning, complemented by
agriculture, WASH, nutrition, health and protection measures.
Enhance speed, predictability and coherence of pooled fund responses under a unified AA framework aligned with the
2026 HNRP.
Lessons applied from 2025: simplified trigger activation, tighter geographic targeting, and streamlined response
packages—making anticipatory action (AA) more operational, scalable and fit-for-purpose in Afghanistan’s climate-risk
context.
To expedite the allocation process and leverage existing partner operations, 10 NGOs (5 international NGOs and 5 national
NGOs) have been pre-identified and invited to submit proposals as the best placed partners based on their operational
capacity in AA in affected areas.
Both funds are strategically aligned under the revised Anticipatory Action (AA) Framework, ensuring harmonized geographic
prioritization, synchronized timelines, and coordinated partner engagement. The framework also actively promotes
complementary financing. Partners are encouraged to mobilize both AA-specific and non-AA co-financing to reinforce
prioritized geographic areas through a layered, multi-sectoral response. In 2025, this approach yielded tangible results: UN
Agencies, Funds and Programmes mobilized an additional $3.6 million in complementary funding—spanning both AA and
non-AA streams—targeted to the same high-risk districts. Furthermore, Education Cannot Wait contributed $0.5 million to
the Agha Khan Foundation, strengthening the education component within the broader drought response architecture.
This catalytic financing model demonstrates how pooled funds can serve as strategic anchors—crowding in additional
resources, enhancing coherence. Cash-Based interventions, and enhanced humanitarian access throughout project design
and implementation.
Learning, monitoring and evaluation
This framework offers significant opportunities to both generate and apply learning, thus contributing to the overall
improvement of humanitarian action in response to slow-onset shocks.
Each agency will use its existing monitoring & evaluation systems to collect and track data on implementation progress and
outputs achieved. All findings will be shared. In addition, partners have agreed to conduct a joint Post Distribution Monitoring
(PDM) in case of a framework activation. All UN agencies receiving CERF funding agreed to share data on targeted people,
within existing regulations, and commit to providing relevant inputs to support the PDM. The final PDM report along with
data will be made available to all framework partners. The PDM will be done in close coordination and communication with
participating agencies.
Similar to 2025, an after-action review will further be conducted to gather lessons learned from the development and
potential implementation of the framework. Partners have also planned a broader / coordinated impact evaluation in 2026.
This will supplement the ongoing impact evaluation by FAO (from late 2025) on behalf of AA implementing partners. Further
11

While approval letters will be sent out immediately following an activation, the administrative transfer of funds to agencies may be delayed by a few
days. To avoid a delay in project implementation, agencies confirm their ability to frontload the resources required to initiate their response until the funding
has been received.

10

discussions could take place for an independent evaluation in 2026, capitalising on OCHA-WFP five year MoU on impact
evaluations focusing on AA.

7. Validity and Future of the Framework
The present framework is valid for an initial period of about two years following endorsement of the ERC (2026-2027). If the
framework activates in 2026, lessons learned from the implementation of the framework will be applied to improve the
framework for 2027 in collaboration with the AA Group.

8. Annexes
Technical Note
The framework uses a two-window trigger with OR logic: activation occurs if either window’s threshold is breached. Window
A (March) evaluates the ECMWF SEAS5 forecasted March-April-May precipitation against a 1-in-6-year return period
threshold (≤129 mm). Window B (April) evaluates a composite drought indicator (CDI) combining five z-score standardised
inputs (ASI, VHI, blended observed/forecast precipitation, snow cover, and soil moisture) against a 1-in-4-year return period
threshold (≥0.503). All indicators are aggregated to a single regional value using an area-weighted mean across the five
provinces. The combined activation frequency is approximately 1-in-4 years.
Thresholds and indicator weights were derived from 42 years of historical data (1984 to 2025). For the purpose of model
training and evaluation, drought years are defined as those in which the FAO end-of-season Agricultural Stress Index (ASI)
exceeds its empirical 1-in-4-year return period. For the March window, we tested multiple configurations; pre-season
observational indicators (February snow cover, soil moisture, cumulative precipitation) did not improve skill when combined
with the SEAS5 forecast, so the forecast is used as a standalone indicator. For the April window, CDI component weights
were estimated using ridge regression. Both windows were validated with leave-one-out cross-validation (LOOCV), where
each year’s trigger decision is made from a model trained without that year’s data. The April CDI achieves a cross-validated
F1 of 0.82, identifying 9 of 10 historical drought years with 2 false activations.
Monitoring is conducted by the Centre for Humanitarian Data via an automated pipeline that retrieves SEAS5 forecasts in
March and observational inputs for the CDI in April.

Core principles
Each anticipatory action framework is tailored to the local context. OCHA has identified nine core principles that should
apply to the framework in Afghanistan:
•

Prioritizing a multi-sectoral approach: Partners should prioritise multi-sectoral, co-targeted interventions, when
possible, to maximise synergies and to achieve great impact.

•

Ensuring the centrality of protection: In line with the IASC centrality of protection policy, and the principle of “leaving
no one behind” (2030 Agenda), all partners implementing anticipatory interventions have the responsibility to ensure
that their response will not aggravate the exposure of communities to risks of violence, insecurity, extortion and
exploitation. Anticipatory actions must also ensure that they benefit all communities (local communities, displaced
communities, returnees, and refugees) based on their needs, with due attention given to obstacles linked to gender,
age, disability or social affiliation.

•

Ensuring gender equality is central to inclusive and accountable anticipatory action: In line with IASC Policy on
Gender Equality and the Empowerment of Women and Girls in Humanitarian Action, all partners are responsible and
accountable to ensure humanitarian action, including anticipatory action is: rights-based; recognises gender-based and
intersectional needs, as well as potential gender-based discrimination in access to resources and services; facilitate
leadership and contribution of crisis-affected women and girls in the planning, implementation, monitoring and
evaluation of anticipatory actions and early response, that directly impact their lives and those of their dependents and
wider communities.

•

Promoting accountability to affected populations and the Protection from Sexual Exploitation and Abuse
(PSEA): Partners engaged in the implementation of the anticipatory action framework are responsible for the integration
of accountability to affected populations approaches in their activities. This includes making all efforts to solicit, hear,
and act upon the voices and priorities of affected people (including the most marginalised and at-risk women, men, girls
and boys) in a coordinated manner, before, during, and after anticipatory action. It also means ensuring that community
feedback leads to corrective action in future anticipatory action.

•

Supporting localisation: All partners involved in the implementation of this framework are expected to honor the HCT’s
commitment towards localisation. Equitable partnerships with local actors building upon their long-term relationships
and trust with communities during anticipatory action are crucial.

•

Engaging in partnerships: Collaboration across humanitarian actors is key to ensuring that all sectors are engaged,
and that assistance is mobilised according to the AA framework.

11

•

Generating development and climate adaptation co-benefits: Pilot participants are encouraged to consider how
financing for anticipatory action can complement financing for development by reducing suffering and addressing the
root causes of problems while supporting adaptation to climate change.

•

Capturing learning: Monitoring, evaluation and learning activities should be embedded at every phase of the
development and implementation of the AA framework.

•

Striving for integration: The framework seeks to integrate the anticipatory action activities into the existing
humanitarian architecture and to foster linkages with long term programming, including resilience and development
initiatives.

12

Annex: Contact List
Agency

Name

Role

Email

UNICEF

Maria Giordano

Senior Emergency Specialist

mgiordano@unicef.org

UNICEF

Kenneth Anyanzo

Social Policy Specialist

kanyanzo@unicef.org

UNICEF

Adane Bekele

WASH Manager

adbekele@unicef.org

UNICEF

WASH Specialist

ahaqmal@unicef.org

UNICEF

Ahmad Seyar Haqmal
Muqadar Shah
Hashimi

Social Policy Specialist

shashimi@unicef.org

UNICEF

Arzi Hussain Akhgar

Social Policy Officer

aakhgar@unicef.org

WFP

Pauline Eloff

Emergency Manager

pauline.eloff@wfp.org

WFP

Jessica Kim

Head of Cash-based Transfers

jessica.kim@wfp.org

WFP

Zabihullah Wahdati

zabihullah.wahdati@wfp.org

WFP

Alexander Riley

WFP

El Masry Moataz

FAO

Sylvie Montembault

Programme Policy Officer (Resilience)
Programme Policy Officer
(Emergencies)
Programme Policy Officer (Early
Warning & GIS)
Head of Monitoring, Analysis and
Strategic Communications

FAO

Devale, Kaustubh

Head of Programmes

Kaustubh.Devale@fao.org

FAO

Sadat, Wahidullah

Anticipatory Action Support Assistant

Wahidullah.Sadat@fao.org

UNFPA

Ana Maria Leal

Humanitarian Coordinator

leal@unfpa.org

UNFPA

Hazrat Amin

Humanitarian Access Officer

haamin@unfpa.org

UNFPA/AAPWG

Fazly Ahmadullah

AAP Specialist

fazly@unfpa.org

UNFPA

Abdul Wasi Stanikzai

AAP Specialist

stanikzai@unfpa.org

OCHA AFG/SCU

Pascal Pillokeit

pascal.pillokeit@un.org

OCHA AFG/SCU

Rami Beirkdar

OCHA AFG/AHF

Serin Hetou

Humanitarian Affairs Officer
Humanitarian Affairs Officer / Cash
Coordination
Humanitarian Affairs Officer /
Programme & Data Management Lead

OCHA AFG/IMU

Sandeep Bashyal

Information Management Officer

bashyal@un.org

OCHA AFG/FCAU

Mirwais Muzafar

Humanitarian Affairs Officer / NR&NER

muzafar@un.org

OCHA AFG/FCAU

Shahrukh Pazhman

Humanitarian Affairs Officer / WR

pazhman@un.org

OCHA HQ/CIS

Billie Getachew

Humanitarian Affairs Officer

getachewalemayehu@un.org

OCHA CHD

Zachary Arno

Data Scientist

zachary.arno@un.org

OCHA CERF

Yakubu Alhassan

Anticipatory Action Specialist

yakubu.alhassan@un.org

OCHA CERF

Regina Omlor

CERF AA Lead

regina.omlor@un.org

OCHA CERF

Nico Rost

CERF Head of Unit

rostn@un.org

OCHA ROAP

Maya Manocsoc

Humanitarian Affairs Officer

maya.manocsoc@un.org

alexander.riley@wfp.org
moataz.elmasry@wfp.org
Sylvie.Montembault@fao.org

mohammed.beirkdar@un.org
hetou@un.org

