Anticipatory Action Framework
Philippines – Tropical Cyclones
As of 03 October 2025
Approved by the RC on 07 October 2025
Endorsed by the ERC on 19 October 2025

Table of Contents
Executive Summary
1. Introduction
2. Forecasts, Scenarios, and Triggers
3. Anticipatory Action Plan
4. Other AA initiatives
5. Government AA
6. Annex

2

Executive Summary
The humanitarian sector is scaling up anticipatory action (AA), enabling proactive
mobilization of resources to get ahead of predictable climate-related shocks and disease
outbreaks through robust forecasting (triggers), pre-agreed activities, and pre-arranged
funding. The objective of this AA framework is to mitigate, and to a certain extent prevent,
the severe impact of typhoons on people’s homes and livelihoods, while building on
government’s mandatory pre-emptive evacuation procedures that save lives. With this
intervention, the most at-risk communities will have better financial resources to prepare
prior to landfall.
This framework outlines an approach to a collective anticipatory action delivered at scale as
an innovative attempt to scale-up typhoon response in the Philippines. The document
includes details about the forecasting trigger (the Model), the pre-agreed action plans (the
Delivery) and the pre-arranged financing (the Money). An investment will be made in
documenting evidence of the impact of AA (the Learning).
The financing
The Emergency Relief Coordinator (ERC) has pre-arranged up to US$ 6 million from the
Central Emergency Response Fund (CERF) to support the present framework. This funding is
complemented by an additional $4 million from other partners, including UN agencies, NGOs
and the Red Cross. The funding will allow partners to provide assistance in Food Security
and Agriculture, Camp Coordination and Camp Management (CCCM) and Emergency
Shelter, Gender Based Violence, Water Sanitation and Hygiene (WASH), Sexual and
Reproductive Health, Child Protection, Nutrition and Education.
The trigger
The financing and activities included in this framework will be triggered by any of the
following: readiness trigger, action trigger or observational trigger. If the readiness and/or
action triggers are reached, the framework is immediately activated. If only the observational
trigger, activation has to be confirmed on/or before landfall or up to 72 hours before landfall
of a super typhoon.
•

Readiness Trigger: 3-7 days prior to forecast landfall (Return Period: 1 in 5.7 years)
o

o
•

Tropical Cyclone (TC) with potential to reach greater than 177 km/h
maximum 10-minute sustained wind speed (200 km/h 1-minute sustained
wind speed) to focus on stronger typhoons.
Projected to directly impact areas within Region 5, 8 and/or 13 (Caraga).

Activation Trigger: on or before 72 hours (3 days) prior to forecast landfall (Return
Period: 1 in 3.4 years)
o

o

Use a separate regional threshold matrix with a return period of more than
three years for Regions V, VIII, and Caraga. This will be used to compare
against 510 model outputs at 72 hours before landfall, in order to account for
varying regional vulnerabilities.
Threshold is reached and the anticipatory action framework is activated if on
or before 72 hours (3 days) prior to landfall (or sooner) the predicted number
3

of houses to be totally damaged fall within the range of the regional threshold
matrix.
•

Readiness activation with action activation
o
o

•

The readiness and action activation can be triggered at the same time with a
cut-off of 72 hours prior to the tropical cyclones forecast landfall.
Activation trigger can be reached and activated if the estimates on the total
number of destroyed houses reaches the regional thresholds even without
readiness trigger activation on/or before 72 hours before the tropical
cyclones forecast landfall.

Observational Triggers: at landfall or up to 72 hours before landfall of a super
typhoon (185 km/h 10 mins sustained wind speed) (Return Period: 1 in 4.5 years)

o If the anticipatory action triggers are not met on/before 72 hours prior to landfall,
an observational trigger may be activated any time from that point up until
landfall (0 to 72 hours before landfall). The classification for a tropical cyclone
activation the observational trigger is a super typhoon on/before landfall with
sustained wind speeds of 185 km/h or higher (10 min sustained windspeed), as
reported by state weather bureau PAGASA.

o OCHA to meet with OCD (if possible) and/or access PDRA scenario (if
available) as soon as possible when a forecast of super typhoon is known. It
can be before the 72hrs or at least 2 days before landfall.
o Meeting of CERF AA agencies to reach a consensus based on available
information should be held as soon as a super typhoon forecast becomes
available. This can happen even before the 72-hour mark, but final decisions
may need to wait until the AA threshold is either met or not met at the cutoff
time of 72hrs before forecast landfall.
o The group would have to consider that at least 50% of region will be within
the damaging winds of super typhoon.

The action plan
The framework will enable agencies to implement both anticipatory and very early response
activities in a coordinated manner. The pre-agreed actions will focus on the following core
objectives:
•
•
•

Communicating risks, engaging with communities, and early warning messaging:
early warnings, community early actions and hygiene messaging.
Providing in-kind assistance: including dignity and hygiene kits, modular tents,
therapeutic nutrition, and water infrastructure rehabilitation.
Provision of Select Types of Cash Assistance: This includes Multi-Purpose Cash
Assistance (MPCA), sector-specific cash, and community cash grants, all aimed at
strengthening household and community level preparedness based on self-identified
priorities.

4

•

Facilitating access to services: through mobile health clinics, maternal and mental
health services, nutrition screening, water quality measures, referrals for protection
needs, and facilitating access to safe storage sites of farm and fishing equipment.

Early response activities were selected based on experience from previous typhoon
responses, operational capacity and the ability to deliver within a short period of time after
the landfall of the typhoon. The implementation of the early response activities as part of
this framework should not exceed 2-4 weeks after the onset of the disaster.
The learning
In 2024, OCHA partnered with Kobo (an international humanitarian non-profit organization)
and researchers at the Harvard Humanitarian Initiative, to design an evaluation of the
framework for Tropical Cyclones. The evaluation will measure the impact of select AA
interventions on households and communities and inform learning from innovative pilots
such as community cash grants and safe storage interventions. An after-action review was
conducted to capture lessons learned from the successive tropical cyclones that occurred in
2024. Among the key updates were the refinement of regional triggers and the integration of
observational triggers into the activation process. The review also incorporated insights
from previous AA activations within the country, as well as experiences from other
countries.
Communication activities
The Resident Coordinator, together with UN agencies and partners, agreed to place strong
emphasis on communications for the upcoming AA framework. This includes a commitment
to communicate as “One UN” — telling a unified story before, during, and after the response.
OCHA, in collaboration with the five participating UN agencies, is currently developing a
communications plan for the OCHA AA framework for 2025. The plan will outline key
messages, communication activities, and strategies for demonstrating the impact of
anticipatory action.
Validity period
The present framework is valid for an initial period of two years following endorsement of
the ERC (2025-2026). The 2025 framework will cover until January 2026 while the 2026
framework will cover until January 2027. This is to cover any unusual tropical cyclones
formation in the month of January. For 2026, lessons learned from both the development
and potential implementation of the framework will be applied to enhance and increase the
scope of the current framework in collaboration with the AA Group.

5

1. Introduction
Tropical Cyclones in the Philippines
According to the World Risk Report 2025, the Philippines, ranked first among all countries for
disaster risks, with index value of 46.56. In October-November 2024, the Philippines was hit
with unprecedented six successive tropical cyclones in a span of five weeks that displaced
more than 13 million people. Without action, climate change will impose substantial
economic and human costs, affecting the poorest households the most. The World Bank
estimates that the economic damages due to climate change in the Philippines could reach
up to 7.6 per cent of GDP by 2030 and 13.6 per cent of GDP by 2040, clearly outpacing its
growth.
The areas of the Philippines most frequently impacted by tropical cyclones are the provinces
along the eastern seaboard, with cyclones making frequent landfall on the islands of Eastern
Visayas, Bicol region, northern Luzon and eastern Mindanao. Approximately twenty tropical
cyclones enter the Philippine Area of Responsibility (PAR) each year, an average of five of
these are potentially destructive. Tropical cyclones with 118 to 220 km/h wind strength or
higher have significant impact to lives and properties, including livelihoods and shelter.
Tropical cyclones can hit the Philippines any time of the year, but the months of June to
November are the most active and May the least active. Tropical cyclones normally move
east to west across the country, heading north or northwest as they exit the PAR. Due to
warm coastal waters of the Philippine Sea, exacerbated by climate change warming, rapid
intensification ahead of landfall is common. Cyclones usually account for at least 30 per
cent of annual rainfall in northern Philippines.
While the typhoon season usually starts in June, the more destructive tropical cyclones tend
to hit the landmass later in the year, from September to December. Destructive tropical
cyclones cause significant losses to agriculture and damages to infrastructure, particularly
health facilities, schools, houses, markets, water facilities, communication, and have serious
humanitarian consequences including loss of livelihoods, reduced income, disruption to
continuing education and exacerbation of pre-crisis protection issues, such as GBV.
Embedding anticipatory action in the existing humanitarian coordination mechanisms
To prevent duplication of coordination platforms, HCT endorsed in May 2021 a review of the
existing HCT Minimum Operations Protocol for Typhoon Response to account for
anticipatory action interventions. Consequently, clusters adjusted their cluster-specific
contingency plans and identified the most suitable early action interventions, relying on their
technical expertise as well as by consulting with communities and considering various
intersectional factors to ensure that anticipatory action is tailored to address the diverse
needs of different community segments.

6

2. Forecasts, Scenarios, and Triggers
Forecasts
Several organizations have implemented forecast-based financing (FbF) activities in the
Philippines for small-scale typhoon response where they developed and used forecast and
trigger mechanisms. In 2021, OCHA and the Centre for Humanitarian Data facilitated
discussion among these organizations to understand various forecasting models developed
for tropical cyclone and to determine the most appropriate methodology to use for the CERF
AA Pilot in the Philippines. After a thorough analysis, it was decided to use the IFRC/510
model. The summary and report link.
The Netherlands Red Cross 510 Initiative model was further revamped from a deterministic
to a probabilistic impact forecast using ECMWF data. It is based on historical data that
captures the relationship between impact (the houses totally damaged) and several
explanatory variables (hazard, vulnerability and exposure). It uses typhoon forecast tracks,
rainfall and wind speed to predict impact.
Scenarios
The 2025 framework will continue to cover Regions 5 (Bicol), 8 (Eastern Visayas), and 13
(Caraga). Unlike the 2023–2024 framework, which used scenario-based groupings—
Scenario 1 covering Region 5 and the Samar Island provinces in Region 8, and Scenario 2
covering the Leyte Island provinces in Region 8 and Region 13—the 2025 activation areas
will be disaggregated by region. This shift is due to the different vulnerabilities of the three
regions as well as allowing for more targeted planning and response tailored to the specific
needs and risk profiles of each region.

7

Triggers
The 2025 OCHA-facilitated AA framework activation is focused on stronger tropical
cyclones, targeting high-impact hazards. This focus was informed by recent discussions in
the AA TWG, as well as lessons learned from previous AA activations in the Philippines. The
overall return period for the triggers in this framework is 1 in 3.5 years
1. Readiness trigger (pre-activation): 3-7 days prior to forecast landfall.
•

•
•
•
•

•

Tropical Cyclone with potential to reach greater than 177 km/h maximum 10minute sustained wind speed or 200 km/h maximum 1-minute sustained wind
speed.
Projected to directly impact areas within Region 5, 8 and 13 (Caraga).
Only the region activated for readiness will be activated for anticipatory action.
Activation for readiness cut-off is 72 hours (3 days) prior to forecasted landfall.
If the forecasted tropical cyclone track is unclear on which region it will impact,
OCHA in close coordination with CERF AA agency focal points will closely
monitor the development and wait until a more definitive track is observed or
until 3 days prior to forecast landfall. CERF AA agency focal points will provide a
recommendation to the RC on which region to potentially activate based on all
available information.
Readiness trigger can be activated with action trigger at the same time on or
before 72 hours before forecast landfall.

2. Activation trigger: on or before 72 hrs (3 days) prior to forecast landfall.
8

•

•

As soon as ECMWF forecasts are available for a certain TC, OCHA Philippines
together with OCHA’s Centre for Humanitarian Data (OCHA CHD) will calculate
the predicted total number of totally damaged buildings using the 510 model,
produce an impact map, and update every 6-12 hours.
Threshold is reached and the OCHA-facilitated anticipatory action is activated if
72 hours (3 days) before landfall (or sooner) the predicted number of houses to
be totally damaged fall within the range of the matrix.

Region/Probability
5
8
13 (Caraga)

•
•
•

95%
2,500
2,000
3,000

80%
6,000
5,000
7,500

70%
10,000
8,000
12,000

60%
15,000
12,000
18,000

50%
25,000
20,000
30,000

AA activation cutoff for the action trigger is 72 hours prior to forecast landfall.
The region where the trigger threshold is reached at 72 hrs before landfall will be
activated.
If two or more regions reach the activation thresholds 72 hrs before landfall, the
region with higher estimated number of destroyed houses will be activated. AA
for more than 1 region cannot be activated at a time.

Separate regional thresholds were developed for Region 2 and 3, aligned with the three regions
covered under the CERFAA Framework. Monitoring and generation of the estimates (region 2
and 3) will be included in the output of the OCHA/CHD model run. WFP will be activating AA
using internal funding in Region 2 and Region 3 guided by the CERF AA Framework triggers and
protocols.
3. Action Activation (no prior readiness activation)
•

•

The readiness and action activation can be triggered at the same time with a cutoff of 72 hours prior to the tropical cyclones forecast landfall. This also implies
that an action trigger can be activated without prior readiness activation.
Activation trigger can be reached and activated if the estimates on the total
number of destroyed houses reaches the thresholds even without readiness
trigger activation on or before 72 hours before the tropical cyclones forecast
landfall.

4. Observational Triggers: at landfall or up to 72 hours before landfall of a super typhoon
(185 km/h, 10 mins sustained wind speed)

•

If the anticipatory action triggers are not met at landfall/at a minimum 72 hours prior
to landfall, an observational trigger may be activated any time from that point up until
landfall (0 to 72 hours before landfall). The classification for a tropical cyclone
activation the observational trigger is a super typhoon on/before landfall with
sustained wind speeds of 185 km/h or higher (10 min sustained windspeed), as
reported by state weather bureau PAGASA.

•

OCHA to meet with OCD (if possible) and/or access PDRA scenario (if available)
as soon as possible when a forecast of super typhoon is known. It can be before
the 72hrs or at least 2 days before landfall.

9

•

•

Meeting of CERF AA agencies to reach a consensus based on available
information should be held as soon as a super typhoon forecast becomes
available. This can happen even before the 72-hour mark, but final decisions
may need to wait until the AA threshold is either met or not met at the cutoff time
of 72hrs before forecast landfall.
The CERF AA group would have to consider that at least 50% of region will be
within the damaging winds of super typhoon.

Return Periods

Activation Protocol
Organization
OCHA PHL, OCHA CHD
and AA focal points

Activity
Monitoring of Tropical
Cyclone (TC) formation;
Join Government PDRA
meetings if invited.

Timeline
6-10 days prior to
forecast landfall

Medium
Communication via the
CERF AA focal points;
regular email update
from OCHA to all AA
focal points at country
and HQ level.

Output
Forecast track and
category of a typhoon;
Generate TC timeline
indicating the dates
and days until forecast
landfall.
10

OCHA CHD and OCHA

Generation of impact
estimates

OCHA and Agency AA
focal points

If the readiness trigger is
reached:
Readiness activation notice
indicating the region is sent
to AA partners.
Meeting with AA agency
focal points.
Notify CERF on the
readiness trigger activation
of AA
CERF sends out approval
letters to agencies,
indicating the allocation of
funds.
Generation of impact
estimates (number of
damage houses with
probability)

RC or OCHA on behalf
of RC
CERF

OCHA CHD and OCHA

UN agencies

RC or OCHA on behalf
of RC

Inform local partners, FSPs
and partner government
agencies on the potential
activation of AA in target
areas. Agencies will also
start implementing
readiness activities.
If action triggers are met
for a particular region on or
before 72 hrs (3 days) prior
to landfall, with or without a
prior readiness trigger,
recommend to RC for AA
Activation
Notify AA partners on
activation action.

RC or OCHA on behalf
of RC

Notify CERF on the action
activation of AA

CERF

If there is no prior
readiness activation, CERF
sends out the approval
letters once the action
trigger threshold is
reached.
Inform local partners, FSPs
and partner government
agencies on the potential
activation of AA in target
areas. Agencies will also
start implementing all AA
activities.
If activation triggers are not
met for a scenario that was
activated for readiness 72
hrs prior to landfall, an
activation trigger stand
down notice.
If the triggers are not met
and there is no indication
that the TC will intensify to
a super typhoon

OCHA CHD and OCHA
and AA focal points

UN agencies

OCHA

CERF

RC or OCHA on behalf
of RC

If TC reaches super
typhoon (>185 kph wind
speed) category on or
before landfall, without the

3-7 days prior to
forecast landfall; every
6-12 hours based on
PAGASA, ECMWF and
other data (if
available)
3-7 days prior to
landfall

Regular email update
from OCHA to core
group, including
country, regional and
HQ level and CERF

3-7 days prior to
landfall

RC or OCHA PHL to
send email to CERF

Upon activation of
readiness trigger

CERF email to RC and
UN agencies

3-5 days prior to
forecast landfall; every
6-12 hours based on
510 modelling
process
3-5 days prior to
landfall

Email to AA
agencies and OCHA
HQ / Regional Office

Impact and probability
estimates, impact
maps and landfall
map

Meeting and email;
Provincial lead to
inform all local
partners including
LGUs

Early warning
messages

On or before 72 hrs (3
days) prior to expected
landfall.

Meeting and email

Recommendation
submitted to the RC
for activation

On or before 72 hrs (3
days) prior to forecast
landfall

RC or OCHA to send
email to AA agencies
and CERF

On or before 72 hrs (3
days) prior to forecast
landfall
Upon activation of
action trigger

RC or OCHA to send
email to CERF

Activation notice sent
to AA partners and
OCHA HQ and
Regional including
CERF secretariat
Email to CERF on AA
action activation

CERF email to RC and
UN agencies

Email from CERF to UN
agencies

3-5 days prior to
landfall

Meeting and email;
Provincial lead to
inform all local
partners including
LGUs

Implementation of AA
activities

<72 hrs prior to
landfall

Meeting and email

Stand down notice
sent to partners and to
CERF

<72 hrs prior to landfall

Email

less than 72 hours
before landfall or at
landfall

Meeting and email

Notice from CERF to
AA agencies to inform
that they cannot spend
the action amount in
the budget
Observational trigger
activation notice to
CERF, AA agencies

Email from RC via
OCHA to agencies with
attached estimates as
well as other
meteorological agency
(i.e. PAGASA) reports

Forecast category and
track of a typhoon;,
Impact and probability
estimates, impact
maps and landfall map
(if possible)
Readiness or action
trigger notice
(indicating which
region is activated) is
sent to AA partners.
Email to the CERF
secretariat on
readiness activation
Email from CERF to UN
agencies

11

CERF

OCHA, AA agencies,
OCHA CHD

activation of the action
trigger, activate
observational trigger
If there is no prior action
trigger activation, CERF
sends out the approval
letters once the
observational trigger
threshold is reached.
Continue monitoring of TC
development after standdown notice

Upon activation of
action trigger

CERF email to RC and
AA agencies

Email from CERF to UN
agencies

1-2 days prior to
landfall

Email

Impact maps ; TC
track

3. Anticipatory Action Plan
1. Pre- Agreed Financing
The ERC has pre-arranged up to $6 million from CERF to support the 2025-2026 framework.
This funding is complemented by an additional $4 million from other partners, including UN
agencies, NGOs and the Red Cross. The funding will allow partners to provide assistance for
Food Security and Agriculture, CCCM and Emergency Shelter, Gender Based Violence,
WASH, Sexual and Reproductive Health, Child Protection, Nutrition and Education. A majority
of the funding will be delivered through Cash (63% for Region 63% for Region 8, 67% Region
13.)i
Region 5 People
targeted
290,00

Region 5 Funding
(USD)
5,649,135

Region 8 People
targeted
416,102

Region 8 Funding
(USD)
5,997,578

Region 13 People
targeted
249,400

Region 13 Funding
(USD)
5,048,355

2. Targeting people at-risk coordination and localization
Region 5 (Bicol), 8 (Eastern Visayas) and 13 (Caraga) were selected as they are most often
where destructive typhoons made their initial landfall, which brings the greatest damage in
terms of wind impact to vulnerable households and communities.
12

Building on lessons learned from the Flagship Initiative on community suggested solutions,
FAO, WFP and UNFPA will continue to provide community cash grants, also termed Group
Cash Transfers (GCT).
Partners agreed to continue to use a harmonise MPC transfer value, using a Minimum
Expenditure Basket methodology to derive the transfer value. Updated MEB value for 2025
as agreed by the Cash Working Group is PHP 11,830, which was endorsed by the HCT in
August 2025. The MPC value for AA is set at PHP 4,000 (US$71), equivalent to 1/3 (33%),
approximately 1/3 of the monthly MEB Transfer Value, to account for the 10-day lead period.
Agency

FAO

IOM

WFP

UNICEF

UNFPA

Modality

People
targeted

Budget

Payments /
Delivery

Targeting

Transfer
Values

MPCA
Community
Cash
Grants

Region 5:
30,196
Region 8:
32,374

Region 5: $958K
Region 8: $959K

SCB and Metrobank
platform with
partner remittance
centers, cash pick
up centers and ewallet outlets

Vulnerable farmers and
fisherfolks

MPCA:
PHP 4,000

Cash for
Shelter

Region 5:
18,353
Region 8:
91,947
Region 13:
34,823

Region 5: $707K
Region 8: $2.2M
Region 13: $1.2M

Palawan
Direct Cash Payout

Pre-identified families
with fragile shelter
status in DSWD 4Ps
registry
IDPs in centres

CfS: PHP
5,500

MPCA

Region 5:
162,895
Region 8:
89,440
Region 13:
167,500

Region 5: $2.7M
Region 8: $1.58M
Region 13: $2.77

Bank to Bank
Transfer

Pre-identified families
registered DSWD 4Ps

MPCA:
PHP 4,000

SP top-up

Region 5:
43,750
Region 8:
161,395

Region 5: $291K
Region 8: $541K

Land Bank

Subset of vulnerable
population identified in
DSWD 4Ps registry

PHP 1,200

Sectoral
Cash for
health/GBV

Region 5:
34,806
Region 8:
44,122
Region 13:
47,077

Region 5: $990K
Region 8: $745K
Region 13: $1.2M

Direct Cash
Partner Remittance
Centres

Pregnant, most
vulnerable adolescent
girls and most at risk
women and girls

PHP
1,5002,850

The OCHA-facilitated AA for 2025 will continue using the coordination model applied in
previous years, ensuring consistent communication and close operational collaboration with
partners and local authorities in the targeted areas.
To strengthen local engagement, each participating UN agency has been designated as the
CERF Anticipatory Action Pilot Lead for specific provinces. These leads are responsible for:
•

Keeping regional, provincial, and municipal authorities well informed about the
project objectives;

•

Inform authorities on the selection of people to target for assistance and ensuring
their involvement in the validation process;
13

•

Ensuring UN partners are represented in key coordination platforms — particularly
the Pre-Disaster Risk Assessment (PDRA) meetings organized by Provincial Disaster
Risk Reduction and Management (DRRM) Offices ahead of potential typhoon
landfalls.

At the national level, OCHA will represent the Humanitarian Country Team (HCT) by
attending the PDRA meetings convened by the National Disaster Risk Reduction and
Management Council (NDRRMC).
Region

Province

Coordination Provincial
Lead

Region V (Bicol Region)

Albay

WFP

Camarines Sur

IOM

Catanduanes

FAO

Sorsogon

WFP

Camarines Norte

WFP

Eastern Samar

UNFPA

Leyte

IOM

Northern Samar
Samar (Western
Samar)

IOM

Southern Leyte

IOM

Surigao Del Norte

WFP

Dinagat Islands

UNFPA

Surigao del Sur

WFP

Region VIII (Eastern
Visayas)

Region VIII (Caraga)

IOM

While the UN agencies are main recipients of CERF funding, each of them works with local
partners to ensure the allocated CERF budget under this framework goes to local NGOs and
strategic partners, to the extent interventions allow such partnerships. For the 2025
framework, 17% of funding in Region 5, 20% in Region 8 and 13% in Caraga will go to NGOs,
including local NGOs. Localization is supported through activities such as Community Cash
Grants and harmonization with the government’s social protection systems.
UN AGENCY
FAO
IOM
UNFPA
UNICEF
WFP

IMPLEMENTING PARTNERS
Educo, Oxfam with People's Disaster Risk Reduction Network (PDRRN), local
farmers/fisherfolks associations
CARE, CRS, World Vision
ADRA, Good Neighbors Philippines (GNIP), Assistance and Cooperation for
Community Resilience and Development, Inc (ACCORD)
Department of Social Welfare and Development (DSWD)
Department of Social Welfare and Development (DSWD)

3. Priority Interventions
FAO will release agro-climatic early warning messages to communities. FAO will provide
multi-purpose cash assistance to 5,750 (Region 5), 5,800 (Region 8) most vulnerable
households of farmers and fisherfolk registered in the Registry System for Basic Sectors in
Agriculture (RSBSA).
FAO will also work with partner organizations, local fisherfolk organizations and
communities to rent identified safe spaces, basketball courts, local community halls, and
private warehouses to store critical livelihood items, such as boats, gears, fishnets and other
14

fishing paraphernalia for fisherfolks and tools and farm equipment for farmers. By providing
safe-storage sites, the intervention will preserve hard-won development gains and key
livelihoods.
IOM, together with implementing partners, will strengthen the application of minimum CCCM
standards in evacuation centres through provision of modular tents, distribution of key
messages and deployment of CCCM personnel; and ensure households with damaged
shelters have immediate access to emergency shelter assistance through cash for shelter
interventions.
UNFPA will provide Direct financial assistance to pregnant women in their last trimester, and
to GBV survivors, including women living in geographically isolated and disadvantaged areas
(GIDA), persons with disabilities (PWDs), pregnant teens, and LGBTQIA+ headed families.
This assistance aims to empower them to prepare for the typhoon and address immediate
needs.
UNFPA will also provide community cash grants ($2,000) to Women-led organizations
funding to facilitate preparedness activities within their communities before the typhoon
makes landfall.
UNICEF will provide an unconditional cash transfer of $22 (Php 1,200) through the
government’s social safety net to support the child-centered needs of vulnerable families
projected to be impacted by a destructive typhoon. In addition, UNICEF will activate child
protection measures, disseminate key sectoral messages, and ensure feedback channels
are accessible to affected communities. Supplies will be prepositioned and replenished for
nutrition and WASH, including water quality monitoring and treatment systems and nutrition
supplies and commodities, to enable rapid testing, treatment, and continuity of essential
services.
WFP’s AA intervention will be the distribution of multi-purpose cash assistance to families
and in the event that the observational trigger is activated depending on assessed needs
WFP will provide community cash grants to selected associations.
4. Learning, Monitoring, and Evaluation
This framework offers significant opportunities to both generate and apply learning, thus
contributing to the overall improvement of humanitarian action ahead of and in response to
rapid-onset shocks. Each agency will use its existing monitoring & evaluation systems (if
possible) to collect and track data on implementation progress and outputs achieved. All
findings will be shared. In addition, partners have agreed to include a set of common
questions into their respective Post Distribution Monitoring (PDM) in case of framework
activation.
The PDM report along with data will be made available to all framework partners. The PDM
will be done in close coordination and communication with participating agencies. An afteraction review will further be conducted to gather lessons learned from the development and
potential implementation of the framework. Upon activation of the AA framework by the
activation trigger, OCHA may engage an external partner to conduct an independent
evaluation of the implementation of AA activities under the framework.

15

In 2022, the CERF AA pilot included a Pre-Crisis Survey and a simulation exercise, both of
which proved instrumental in enhancing the design and implementation of subsequent CERF
AA frameworks. These activities provided valuable insights into operational readiness,
stakeholder coordination, and trigger validation. The pre-crisis survey offered a real
opportunity to embed accountability to affected people within the design phase of the
anticipatory action interventions. Feedback from communities at risk was used to determine
which AA activities were feasible and preferred.
5. Advocacy and public communication
The UN agencies and partners agreed to put strong emphasis on communication activities
also to ensure communicating a common message before, during, and after the AA
interventions.
The focus of communications efforts will be on explaining the process of AA activation and
non-activation targeted to LGUs and affected communities and beneficiaries.
6. Validity
The present framework is valid for an initial period of two years following endorsement of
the ERC (2025-2026). The 2025 framework will cover until January 2026 while the 2026
framework will cover until January 2027. This is to cover any unusual tropical cyclones
formation in the month of January. For 2026, lessons learned from both the development
and potential implementation of the framework will be applied to enhance the current
framework in collaboration with the AA partners agencies.
This includes, among other things, potential changes to the trigger mechanism, coordination,
financing, co-funding, action plan (especially the integration of multi-purpose cash), and
geographical scope.
In the event of an activation, request for replenishment can be initiated by a request from the
CERF AA agencies coordinated by OCHA through the RC. This is dependent on the approval
of the ERC.

4. Other anticipatory action initiatives in the Philippines for
tropical cyclones
Beyond the UN agencies directly receiving CERF funding for AA, OCHA is actively
coordinating with a broader group of partners to support efficient and cohesive
implementation across the board. OCHA is part of the core group of member agencies under
the AA Technical Working Group (AATWG) currently chaired by the Department of Social
Welfare and Development (DSWD) and co-chaired by the Philippines Red Cross (PRC). The
core group members includes WFP, FAO, StartNetwork and Oxfam.
This coordination includes joint discussions on geographical targeting, transparent
communication around trigger activation, and timely information sharing. While these
partners receive CERF funding indirectly through UN agencies, many develop their own
framework with their own internal resources or donor funds to expand the reach of AA
interventions and support additional people at risk.
Agencies

Location

Activities

Amount (in USD)
16

Start Network

Region 2, 8, Caraga

Cash Grants, hygiene kits, assistive
devices

Plan International
Pilipinas

Region 4B, 8, 12

Cash for food, MPCA, distribution of
hygiene kits/water kits,
livestock/assets evacuation and
tagging

WFP

Region 2 and 3

MPCA

Oxfam Pilipinas

Region 5, 8, and
BARMM

MPCA, evacuation support, cleaning
kits, medicine prepositioning,
community orientation

Philippine Red
Cross

All

Sectoral cash, shelter strengthening

•Moderate: $485K
•High: $892K
• Very High: $1.1M
$42K

$1.2M
$1.9M
$19K-68K

$423K

WFP will be activating AA using internal funding in Region 2 and Region 3 using OCHA AA
Framework triggers and protocols.

5. Government AA Institutionalization Initiative
In 2022, the National AA Technical Working Group (TWG), which is co-led with Government
agencies, initiated the creation of a bill to institutionalize AA in the government
preparedness and response structure. Through the work and advocacy of the AA TWG, the
bill on the Declaration of the State of Imminent Disaster has been passed in the Philippine
Congress and Senate on its Third and final reading in June 2025 and was signed into a law
by the President on 12 September 2025 (RA 12287). The law will empower the Government
17

to act earlier, enabling preventative measures and reducing potential harm before a disaster
strikes. It will utilize standardized triggers and thresholds to activate and will tap into Local
DRRM Funds, and National DRRM Funds for anticipatory actions. It also requires agencies to
allocate portions of their budgets for AA, ensuring that financial resources are available and
accessible when needed. The formulation of the Implementing Rules and Regulations (IRR)
will be initiated by the National Government with technical support from members of the AA
Technical Working Group. The next iteration of the framework will fully align with the
legislation once the IRR is developed.
The Government of the Philippines led by PAGASA is currently developing Multi-Hazard
Impact-Based Forecasting and Early Warning System (MHIBFEWS). It is impact-based
forecasting that includes typhoons, landslides and other climate related shocks that
combine data and local knowledge to predict the potential impact to communities. The
system is expected to serve as a platform to harmonize AA triggers and thresholds starting
in 2026.

6. Annexes
Core Principles
Each anticipatory action framework is tailored to the local context. OCHA has identified nine
core principles that should apply to the framework in the Philippines:
• Prioritizing a multi-sectoral approach: Partners should prioritise multi-sectoral, co-targeted interventions, when
possible, to maximise synergies and to achieve great impact.
• Ensuring the centrality of protection: In line with the IASC centrality of protection policy, and the principle of
“leaving no one behind” (2030 Agenda), all partners implementing anticipatory interventions have the
responsibility to ensure that their response will not aggravate the exposure of communities to risks of violence,
insecurity, extortion and exploitation. Anticipatory actions must also ensure that they benefit all communities
(local communities, displaced communities, returnees, and refugees) based on their needs, with due attention
given to obstacles linked to gender, age, disability or social affiliation.
• Ensuring gender equality is central to inclusive and accountable anticipatory action: In line with IASC Policy on
Gender Equality and the Empowerment of Women and Girls in Humanitarian Action, all partners are responsible
and accountable to ensure humanitarian action, including anticipatory action is: rights-based; recognises gender
based and intersectional needs, as well as potential gender-based discrimination in access to resources and
services; facilitate leadership and contribution of crisis-affected women and girls in the planning,
implementation, monitoring and evaluation of anticipatory actions and early response, that directly impact their
lives and those of their dependents and wider communities.
• Promoting accountability to affected populations and the Protection from Sexual Exploitation and Abuse
(PSEA): Partners engaged in the implementation of the anticipatory action framework are responsible for the
integration of accountability to affected populations approaches in their activities. This includes making all
efforts to solicit, hear, and act upon the voices and priorities of affected people (including the most marginalised
and at-risk women, men, girls and boys) in a coordinated manner, before, during, and after anticipatory action. It
also means ensuring that community feedback leads to corrective action in future anticipatory action.
• Supporting localisation: All partners involved in the implementation of this framework are expected to honor
the HCT’s commitment towards localisation. Equitable partnerships with local actors building upon their longterm relationships and trust with communities during anticipatory action are crucial.
• Engaging in partnerships: Collaboration across humanitarian actors is key to ensuring that all sectors are
engaged, and that assistance is mobilised according to the AA framework.

18

• Generating development and climate adaptation co-benefits: Pilot participants are encouraged to consider how
financing for anticipatory action can complement financing for development by reducing suffering and
addressing the root causes of problems while supporting adaptation to climate change.
• Capturing learning: Monitoring, evaluation and learning activities should be embedded at every phase of the
development and implementation of the AA framework.
• Striving for integration: The framework seeks to integrate the anticipatory action activities into the existing
humanitarian architecture and to foster linkages with long term programming, including resilience and
development initiatives.

Draft Activation Messages
Readiness trigger message
From: Arnaud Peral, RC or OCHA Philippines
To: CERF secretariat
CC: OCHA Philippines, OCHA HQ and Regional Teams, AA Agencies (including agencies that are not recipients of CERF funds)
Dear CERF secretariat,
The readiness trigger has been reached as based on PAGASA and ECMWF data a Tropical Cyclone with potential to reach wind
speed greater than 177 km/h maximum 10-minutes sustain wind speed/200 km/h 1-minute sustain wind speed is projected to
directly impact areas within Region 5/8/13. Under the Framework Region 5/8/13 is now activated for readiness. Region5/8/13
funding requirement is xx M for FAO, IOM, UNFPA, UNICEF and WFP.
Details are attached. Grateful for your swift attention to this notice.
Activation trigger message
From: Arnaud Peral, RC or OCHA Philippines Head on his behalf
To: AA Agencies
CC: CERF secretariat, OCHA HQ and Regional Teams
Dear AA Agencies, Since the readiness trigger has been reached, the OCHA with CHD monitored every 6-12 hours the forecast
model and its predictions on the number of totally damaged houses. Based on the latest impact map, activation threshold has
been reached as the predicted number of destroyed houses amounts to [XXX] with [xx%] probability, which falls within the
range of the threshold probability matrix under Region 5/8/13. Since we have activated for readiness Region 5/8/13, we are
therefore activating the CERF anticipatory action Framework for Region 5/8/13 within the 72 hours (3 days) before projected
landfall. Further details are attached. Good luck to the teams implementing anticipatory action interventions.

19

Contact List
Agency

Name

Email

FAO

Ruth Georget

ruth.georget@fao.org

FAO

Sandro Pantua

sandro.pantua@fao.org

FAO

Francis Galenzoga

francis.galenzoga@fao.org

IOM

Euan McDougall

emcdougall@iom.int

IOM

Kimberly Go Tian

kgotian@iom.int

UNFPA

Dofel Joseph Calla

calla@unfpa.org

UNFPA

Celia Fatima De Jesus

cdejesus@unfpa.org

UNICEF

Ziaul Hassan

mzhassan@unicef.org

UNICEF

Kamille Ruiz

kruiz@unicef.org

UNICEF

Jeonoah Kali Fornoles

jfornoles@unicef.org

WFP

Hannes Goegele

hannes.goegele@wfp.org

WFP

Harold Javier

harold.javier@wfp.org

WFP

Zuhaina Abubacar

zuhaina.abubacar@wfp.org

OCHA CHD

Pauline Ndirangu

pauline.ndirangu@un.org

OCHA CHD

Leonardo Milano

leonardo.milano@un.org

OCHA/CIS

Hanna Paulose

hanna.paulose@un.org

OCHA/CERF

Yakubu Alhassan

yakubu.alhassan@un.org

OCHA/CERF

Nicolas Rost

rostn@un.org

OCHA/CERF

Regina Omlor

regina.omlor@un.org

OCHA/CERF

Sumana Palle

sumana.palle@un.org

OCHA/CRD

Lucie Boucher

lucie.boucher@un.org

OCHA ROAP

Vincent Omuga

omuga@un.org

OCHA ROAP

Agustin Orengo

orengo@un.org

OCHA ROAP

Maya Manocsoc

maya.manocsoc@un.org

OCHA-PHL

Melissa Correa

melissa.correa@un.org

OCHA-PHL

Joseph Addawe

addawe@un.org

Oxfam Pilipinas

Rhoda Avila

rhoda.avila@oxfam.org.ph
20

Philippine Red Cross

Criselda Longga

criselda.longg@redcross.org.ph

Philippine Red Cross

Steven Laranjo

s.laranjo@redcross.org.ph

Philippine Red Cross

Kath Zambas

k.zambas@redcross.org.ph

Plan International Pilipinas

Jessilou Morigo

Start Network

Arvin Caro

jessilou.morigo@planinternational.org
arvin.caro@startnetwork.org

21

