Anticipatory Action Framework
Nepal Monsoon Floods – 2024 Revision
Approved by the Resident Coordinator on 27 September 2024
Approved by the Chief of CERF on 30 September 2024

1. Executive Summary
The purpose of this document is to present the framework for anticipatory action (AA) in Nepal, including the forecasting
trigger (the model), the pre-agreed action plans (the delivery) and the pre-arranged financing (the money). The initial
framework was endorsed in 2021 for a two-year period and subsequently extended for the 2023 and 2024 monsoon
seasons. This document includes modifications made in previous years and lessons learned from the 2022 activation.
The objective of this framework is to provide collective anticipatory humanitarian action to people at risk of predicted severe
monsoon flooding in Nepal. The initiative will aim to provide life-saving assistance to up to 238,831 people across 15 floodprone municipalities (“palikas”):
•
•

In eastern Nepal: Koshi Province, Sunsari district – 4 palikas; Madhesh Province, Saptari district - 5 palikas
In western Nepal: Lumbini Province, , Bardiya district – 4 palikas; Sudurpaschim Province, Kailali district - 2 palikas.

The model relies on the Global Flood Awareness System (GloFAS) as well as the Government of Nepal’s flood warning
systems. To provide agencies with the maximum window of opportunity to deliver anticipatory action on a no-regrets basis,
and building on the lessons learned of the 2020 anticipatory action pilot for monsoon flooding in Bangladesh, this framework
relies on a two-step trigger system:
•
•

Stage I: A readiness trigger based on the GloFAS forecast, that will provide a maximum of 7 days’ lead time.
Stage II: An action trigger based on government system’s flood warning system and the GloFAS forecast, that will
provide anywhere from 3 hours to 3 days’ lead.

Given that this framework targets two major river basins in Nepal, which are not linked, there are separate trigger systems
for each river basin: one for the Karnali (in western Nepal) and one for the Koshi Basin (in eastern Nepal).
The delivery of anticipatory action is time-sensitive. Four UN agencies – FAO, UNFPA, UNICEF, and WFP – in partnership
with the Nepal Red Cross Society (NRCS), national and local NGOs and in close collaboration with the federal, provincial
and local government and district authorities, will:
•

Distribute multi-purpose digital cash payments: Over US$3 million will be transferred to vulnerable flood-prone
households to meet their essential needs. WFP and UNICEF will provide 15,000 Nepalese Rupees per household.
UNFPA will provide small digital cash top-ups to women and girls to facilitate access to obstetrics care and genderbased violence services.

•

Provide in-kind assistance: To complement the digital cash assistance, UN agencies will provide households with
essential items to mitigate the potential impacts of the flood. UNICEF will distribute hygiene kits, water purification
tablets, jerry cans, buckets and mugs and will install emergency toilets in evacuation centers. UNFPA will distribute
dignity kits and reproductive health kits. FAO will provide hermetic bags for waterproof storage of grains and seeds.
Deliver services: The framework provides an opportunity to deploy trained personnel to provide important genderinclusive services to potential flood-affected households at evacuation sites and other assembly points. UNFPA
and its partners will deploy community psychosocial workers and female community health volunteers to promote
sexual and reproductive health as well as gender-based violence services. UNICEF will deploy trained community
psychosocial workers. Agencies and their partners will also provide early warning messages to vulnerable
households.

•

The money for the framework comes from different sources, mainly from the Central Emergency Response Fund (CERF)
of up to $6.5 million. CERF financing will be released as automatically as possible immediately once the defined triggers

The mission of the United Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) is to
Coordinate the global emergency response to save lives and protect people in humanitarian crises.
We advocate for effective and principled humanitarian action by all, for all.
www.unocha.org

OCHA | 2

are reached in each river basin. The pre-arranged financing agreement with CERF is in place for one severe flooding event
per river basin until the end of 2024.

United Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
www.unocha.org

OCHA | 3

2. Introduction
Objectives of anticipatory action
There is broad agreement on the need for the international humanitarian sector to move from a largely responsive approach
to an anticipatory approach. An anticipatory approach leads to a more effective, efficient and dignified response. It also
protects hard-won development gains.
Today, we can predict with increasing confidence the occurrence and humanitarian impact of certain climate- and weatherrelated shocks. By combining different analytical approaches, out-of-the-ordinary weather events can not only be predicted,
but their projected impact can proactively be mitigated based on pre-identified anticipatory actions. Building on growing
evidence that acting prior to the onset of a predictable hazard is significantly more (cost-)effective than traditional
humanitarian response, OCHA has facilitated the setup of multiple Anticipatory Action frameworks.
Each framework comprises 3 core elements, all of which are underpinned by a clear learning, monitoring and evaluation
plan:
•
•
•

A robust forecasting embedded in a clear decision-making process (the model).
Pre-agreed action plans that can fundamentally alter the trajectory of the crisis (the delivery).
Pre-arranged finance (the money).

Anticipatory action is still an innovative space, requiring “proof of concept”. Thus, in addition to the 3 core elements, OCHA
also invests in documenting evidence and learning from each framework.

Core principles
Each anticipatory action framework is tailored to the local context. OCHA has identified nine core principles for the
framework in Nepal:
•

Prioritizing a multi-sectoral approach: Partners should prioritize multi-sectoral, co-targeted interventions when
possible to maximize synergies and to achieve great impact.

•

Ensuring the centrality of protection: In line with the IASC centrality of protection policy, and the principle of
“leaving no one behind” (2030 Agenda), all partners implementing anticipatory interventions have the responsibility
to ensure that their response will not aggravate the exposure of communities to risks of violence, insecurity,
extortion and exploitation. Anticipatory actions must also ensure that they benefit all communities (local
communities, displaced communities, returnees, and refugees) based on their needs, with due attention given to
obstacles linked to gender, age, disability or social affiliation.

•

Promoting accountability to affected populations: Partners engaged in the implementation of the anticipatory
action framework are responsible for the integration of accountability to affected populations approaches in their
activities. This includes making all efforts to solicit, hear, and act upon the voices and priorities of affected people
(including the most marginalized and at-risk women, men, girls and boys) in a coordinated manner, before, during,
United Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
www.unocha.org

OCHA | 4

and after anticipatory action. It also means ensuring that community feedback leads to corrective action in future
anticipatory action.
•

Supporting localization: All partners involved in the implementation of this framework are expected to honour the
HCT’s commitment towards localization. Equitable partnerships with local actors building upon their long-term
relationships and trust with communities during anticipatory action are crucial.

•

Engaging in partnerships: Collaboration across humanitarian actors is key to ensuring that all sectors are
engaged, and that assistance is mobilized according to the AA framework.

•

Using cash where possible: OCHA encourages the use of cash as the default assistance modality where markets
and operational contexts permit.

•

Generating development co-benefits: Framework participants are encouraged to consider how financing for
anticipatory action can complement financing for development by reducing suffering and addressing the root causes
of problems. For instance, if the pre-agreed anticipatory action plan includes the repair of boreholes, implementing
agencies should ensure that the quality of the repairs will last beyond the immediate humanitarian crisis.

•

Capturing learning: Monitoring, evaluation and learning activities should be embedded at every phase of the
development and implementation of the AA framework.

•

Striving for integration: The framework seeks to integrate the anticipatory action activities into the existing
humanitarian architecture and to foster linkages with long term programming, including resilience and development
initiatives.

Alignment with Government Policy
The AA framework for Nepal is prepared in consultation with the Government of Nepal, Department of Hydrology and
Meteorology, the National Disaster Risk Reduction and Management Authority (NDRRMA), and relevant line Ministries
(especially government cluster leads) for the different activities. It follows on ongoing discussions from the National and
Regional Anticipatory Action Dialogue Platforms, and builds on national, regional and global good practices. The AA
framework will continue to evolve in line with the Government of Nepal’s disaster act, policies, framework, guidelines etc.
including the Disaster Risk Reduction and Management Rules, 2076 (2019) and with future policy, including National Early
Action Protocols (NEAPs) and other tools. The long-term goal is to support the integration of Anticipatory Action into local
and national systems for disaster risk reduction and management, such as shock-responsive safety nets, to produce
sustainable approaches to AA for the range of hazards, including climate adaption. Lessons learned from the
implementation of this AA framework and related activities should form the basis for ongoing discussions with the
Government on the development of policies to shape and guide AA initiatives in the future.

Monsoon flooding in Nepal
Exposure
One of Nepal’s three geographical zones, the flat plains of the Terai areas, is at the highest risk of flooding during the
monsoon season. Monsoon rains typically lead to landslide damming, excessive erosion of hill slopes, and rock falls in the
country’s two other geographical zones: the Hill and Mountain areas 1.

1

UN, Nepal: Monsoon Emergency Response Preparedness Plan 2020 (2020).
United Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
www.unocha.org

OCHA | 5

Vulnerability
CERF-funded Anticipatory Action frameworks should be
needs-based. They are encouraged to identify those groups
that are especially vulnerable to the specific shock that is
being anticipated, and should prioritize groups such as
women, girls, persons with disabilities, and persons in need of
protection assistance.

Humanitarian impact
In 2017, monsoon floods affected some 1.7 million people in
the Terai, including 460,000 who were displaced. Economic
losses were estimated at US$705M. The flooding impacted 35
of the country’s 75 districts, with the Ministry of Home Affairs
reporting at the time that over 80 per cent of the land in the
Terai – Nepal’s breadbasket – was inundated.
Since 2006, CERF has allocated US$59.5M to Nepal, including US$13.5M for rapid responses to floods.2 In October 2022
predicted severe flooding in western Nepal led to a full activation of this framework and the disbursement of US $3.2M from
CERF, enabling UNFPA, UN Women, WFP and their partners to distribute digital cash payments, comprehensive relief
packages (food and non-food items, energy saving cooking device, solar radio, clothes) and hygiene, dignity and health
kits; and to deliver services such as psycho-social counseling.
Flood typically affects the districts along the length of Nepal’s southern border (See Figure).

Seasonal forecast for 2024

The Government of Nepal's Department of Hydrology and Meteorology has forecasted the 2024 monsoon season from
June 1 to September 30, 2024. Below are the key details of the forecast:
Overall Monsoon Outlook: Most of the country will experience above-normal rainfall, with a probability ranging from 35%
to 55%.

2

CERF funded flood responses in 2008 (US$3.6M), 2014 (US$1.9M), 2017 (US$4.8M), 2022 ($3.2)
United Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
www.unocha.org

OCHA | 6

Provincial Outlook:
Normal Monsoon (Probability 35%-45%):
•Few areas in the northwest of Sudur Paschim Province.
•Southeast area of Bagmati Province.
•Mid-area of Madhesh Province.
•Mid and mid-west region of Koshi Province.
Above-Normal Monsoon (Probability 55%-65%):
•Mid-region of Gandaki Province.
•Southeast region of Madhesh Province.
In summary, the majority of Nepal is expected to experience above-normal rainfall during the monsoon season, with specific
regions having varying probabilities of normal and above-normal monsoon conditions.

United Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
www.unocha.org

OCHA | 7

3. Forecast and Trigger
Triggers and thresholds
A trigger for anticipatory action should be based on a set of criteria to help answer the questions when and where to act
before an imminent disaster. It should forecast when a hazard risks becoming an out-of-the-ordinary (or severe) shock and
the humanitarian impact is likely to cross a certain threshold for the exposed vulnerable community.
There are two main challenges in developing a trigger for flooding: typically flood models can only provide a maximum of
2-3 weeks of advance warning, and there is an inverse correlation between the reliability of flood warnings and the amount
of warning time (i.e., the earlier the warning, the less reliable it tends to be).
Additionally, the development of a two-step trigger system3 for the Nepal AA framework is more complex than in, for
example, the Bangladesh AA pilot for several of reasons. Firstly, Nepal’s mountainous terrain means that flood forecasting
models struggle for lead times above a few days. Secondly, while water levels can be used to define historical flood events,
the link between water levels and impact has not yet been clearly established. Finally, the framework plans to target multiple
major river basins in Nepal, which are not linked. This initiative therefore relies on separate systems: one for the Karnali
Basin (in western Nepal) and one for the Koshi Basin (in eastern Nepal).
To provide agencies with the maximum window of opportunity for funding to be disbursed in time for agencies to deliver
anticipatory action on a no-regrets basis, and building on the lessons learned from earlier AA project as well as the
Bangladesh monsoon flooding AA pilot, the Nepal framework relies on a two-step trigger system for each basin system
(see page 7 for basin-specific thresholds):
•
•

Stage I: A readiness trigger based on the GloFAS4 forecast, that will provide a maximum of 7 days’ lead time ahead
of peak flooding.
Stage II: An action trigger based on Nepal Government, Department of Hydrology and Meteorology’s River Watch
system and the GloFAS forecast, that will provide anywhere from 3 hours to 3 days’ lead time.
Readiness Trigger

Action Trigger

GloFAS 7-day forecast predicts
70% probability of reaching 1-in2-year return period

Flood warning bulletin issued by the Government of Nepal’s
Department of Hydrology and Meteorology (DHM)
+
GloFAS 3-day forecast
predicts 70%
Water level reaches governmentprobability of reaching
OR
defined danger level
1-in-2 year return
(3-hour warning only)
period

The GloFAS river discharge 1-in-2 year return period was selected after the analysis of the GloFAS forecast skill revealed
that the model tends to underestimate observed river discharge. For this reason, a 1-in-2 year return period threshold
applied to a 70% forecast confidence actually corresponds to lower frequency / higher impact events for the action trigger
at Chatara (1-in-2.5 year) and both triggers at Chisapani (1-in-6 year for the action trigger).The action trigger relies on two
components: the DHM flood bulletin on one hand and the GloFAS 3-day forecast or government-based observational data
on the other. The use of DHM bulletins ensures that the framework is only activated for high impact events.
The GloFAS model is able to capture only between 30% and 70% of the high impact events recorded in the past. In order
to deal with this limitation, the action trigger also includes a real-time water level component. While this only provides a few
hours of warning, this information will nevertheless improve the quality of the trigger system by reducing the likelihood of
missing any major events.

Consisting of a ‘readiness’ trigger to launch a set of preparatory activities and an ‘action’ trigger to launch the delivery of assistance to people at risk.
The Global Flood Awareness System (GloFAS), implemented by the European Commission, is designed to support preparatory measures for flood
events worldwide, particularly in large trans-national river basins. GloFAS combines information from satellites, models and in-situ measurements.
https://www.globalfloods.eu/
3
4

United Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
www.unocha.org

OCHA | 8

However, as with all trigger systems, there are limitations. Due to the challenging nature of forecasting river discharge in
Nepal, only a fraction of GloFAS 1-in-2 year return period exceedance events are expected to be correctly forecasted with
4-7 days lead time. The implication for the project is that this model/mechanism has a non-negligible probability of
reaching the action trigger directly without a readiness trigger first. This will not impact the amount of funding that
CERF will release, nor will it affect the plan of pre-agreed activities; some of these activities will simply have to be
implemented once the flooding has already started.
The RCO will coordinate and engage with the relevant government agencies and technical partners to make better use of
available national forecast models and other dataset, to reduce the model forecast biases.
River Basin

Karnali (WEST)

Koshi (EAST)

Station that will be
monitored using GloFAS

Chisapani

Chatara

GloFAS forecast skill

Moderate to very poor for low, moderate,
and extreme values (15 to80% error)
Very good. For extreme values, good to
moderate with bias being between 0 to
negative 20% for all lead times.
5700 m3/s

Poor for low, moderate values and
extreme values (>40% error)
Very good to moderate, with being
between 0% and 15% for all values and
between 10% and 35% negative for
extreme values for all lead times.
8100 m3/s

1-in-2 year
5700 m3/s

1-in-2 year
8100 m3/s

1-in-2 year
10.5 m at Chisapani river station

1-in-2 year
7.0 m at Chatara river station

GloFAS forecast bias

Readiness Threshold:
GloFAS - River discharge
m3/s
Return period
Action Threshold: GloFAS River discharge m3/s
Return period
Action Threshold: DHM –
water danger level

Roles and responsibilities in monitoring the trigger
Both the action and readiness trigger will be monitored by OCHA’s Centre for Humanitarian Data and the Resident
Coordinator’s Office in Nepal.

Activation protocol
There are two key decision-points in the sudden-onset AA frameworks that rely on a 2-stage trigger:
United Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
www.unocha.org

OCHA | 9

•
•

Confirming that the threshold for the readiness trigger has been reached, which will precipitate the disbursement of
funds and the implementation of readiness activities.
Confirming that the threshold for the action trigger has been reached, which will precipitate the implementation of
all anticipatory activities.

CERF will disburse funds as soon as the readiness trigger is reached. As highlighted above, there is a non-negligible
probability of reaching the action trigger directly without a readiness trigger first. In this event, CERF will disburse funds as
soon as the action trigger is reached.
Pre-defining this activation protocol is critical in order to avoid delays, miscommunication, uncertainty or errors once the
trigger threshold is reached. The Resident Coordinator’s Office of Nepal, with support from OCHA’s Centre for Humanitarian
Data, will monitor the GloFAS model forecasts and the DHM’s bulletins, and will notify the UN agencies and CERF by email
immediately once the readiness and action triggers are reached (see specific steps below). Informal communication
channels will be maintained to ensure adequate information sharing.

When

Who

What

From June

RCO and CHD

Monitoring of GloFAS
model and DHM website

If a trigger is reached

RCO and CHD

Confirmation of trigger

If trigger is confirmed

RCO

Informs RC, CERF and UN
agencies

CERF

Sends pre-approved CERF
approval letters to UN
agencies

United Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
www.unocha.org

OCHA | 10

4. Anticipatory Action Plan
Selection criteria
Anticipatory actions will aim to interrupt the pathways outlined in the crisis timeline section above by targeting populations
most at risk of being impacted by a shock. The following criteria were applied to select actions:
1. Anticipatory character: Is the action effective in preventing or reducing the humanitarian impact of the shock?
2. Ability to deliver within the window of opportunity: Is it possible to carry out the action effectively with the
available forecast lead time, i.e., in the window of opportunity?
3. Operational capacity: Do the agency and its IPs have the institutional capacity (thematic, logistic, administrative,
financial, human resources) to implement the action effectively given the lead time and scale?
4. No regrets approach: In the case of a false alarm, will the proposed actions benefit rather than negatively the
targeted population?

Priority interventions
The pre-agreed actions will focus on the following core objectives:
•
•
•
•

Distributing multi-purpose cash: Providing cash assistance is an appropriate and impactful modality given the
very short window of opportunity between the readiness trigger and the peak of floods.
Communicating risks, engaging with communities, and messaging: Clusters have emphasized the importance
of disseminating joint early warning signals as well as sector-specific messaging.
Providing in-kind assistance: A limited set of in-kind assistance activities that can be mobilized within the very
short window of opportunity will complement the cash transfers.
Facilitating access to services: The framework provides an opportunity to provide access to sexual and
reproductive health services for pregnant and lactating women, women at risk of GBV, and survivors of GBV via
conditional cash transfers. Additionally, child protection services will be facilitated.

The summary table provides a snapshot of each agency’s proposed activities. Further details can be found in CERF
application documents.

Summary table
Outcome

Intervention

Agency

The most flood-vulnerable households
are able to meet their essential needs

Multi-purpose
digital cash
payments

WFP

•

Single MPC distribution

UNICEF

•

Single MPC distribution

The most flood-vulnerable households
have improved access to WASH,
sexual and reproductive health, and
agricultural items

Non-food items

UNICEF

•
•
•
•
•

Hygiene kits and hygiene promotion
Water purification tablets
Establishment and repair of emergency
WASH facilities at evacuation centers
Jerry cans, buckets and mugs
Emergency toilets

FAO

•

Hermetic grain storage bags

UNFPA

•
•

Dignity kits
IARH kits

UNFPA

•

Deployment of female community health
volunteers (FCHVs) and Nepal Red
Cross volunteers to promote SRH and
GBV services with relevant risk
communication materials
Deployment of trained community
psychosocial workers in affected

The most flood-vulnerable households
are able to access essential life-saving
services

Services

Proposed activities

•

United Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
www.unocha.org

OCHA | 11

•
•

UNICEF

•
•

Flood-vulnerable households receive
early warning information

Risk messages

FAO,
UNFPA,
UNICEF,
WFP

•

communities for psychosocial first aid
and referral to GBV services
Provision of GBV services at Women
Friendly Spaces
Unconditional cash assistance for
pregnant women and women at risk of
GBV
Deployment of community psycho-social
support workers for child protection
Child protection monitoring and referral
All agencies distribute early warning
signals and sector-specific information

Early warning messages
All four participating agencies will provide early warning messages to at-risk communities after the readiness and action
triggers are reached.

Agency

Subject

Modality

FAO

Sector-specific messages (Agriculture)

Video through local TV
channels, radio, social media,
megaphones

UNFPA

Sector-specific messages (GBV, SRH)

Local radio

UNICEF

Flood warning, MPC assistance, sectorspecific messages (WASH, Child
Protection and behaviour change)

Local radio, Megaphones,
SMS/interactive voice
response (IVR)

WFP

Flood warning, MPC assistance

SMS

Targeting
The pilot projects rely on a three-stage approach to identify the most-at risk households:
•

Geographical: Targeting is based on an overlay of flood risk (using Sentinel-1 imagery for 2017, 2019 and 2020)
and socio-economic vulnerability measures including poverty, food poverty, housing condition, marginalized
groups, stunting and wasting. Additionally, consultation with humanitarian organizations with extensive field-level
experience on historical floods and flood response, engagement with local governments and seasonal monsoon
forecast are taken into consideration for final selection of municipalities.

•

Feasibility: The list of municipalities was refined by focusing on those areas that could be covered under either of
the GloFAS-based trigger mechanisms. The priority list includes 9 municipalities covered by the trigger mechanism
for the East and 6 municipalities covered by the trigger mechanism for the West5.

5

East: Barachchetra, Bhokraha Narsingh, Harinagar, Koshi, Chhinamasta, Hanumannagar Kankalini, Kanchanrup, Saptakoshi, Tilathi
Koiladi. West: Geruwa, Madhuwan, Rajapur, Thakurbaba, Janaki, Tikapur
United Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
www.unocha.org

OCHA | 12

•

Household-level: In coordination with local government at rural/municipal level, households-at-risk are identified
in advance based on combination of hazard maps based on historical flood events, exposure to floods, socioeconomic vulnerability of households. Vulnerability factors include:
o the building construction type
o the household’s ability to survive on their own land production for up to 3-6 months
o the household’s dependence on agriculture and/or casual labour
o the household’s education level
o the household’s social protection status
o female-headed households and households with persons with disabilities

UNICEF: HH selected based on vulnerabilities, who lives in the settlement along Koshi river basin, in consultation with
municipalities and validated by the local government. Also, prioritizing for Landless, daily wage workers, female headed
HHs, family with person with disability and under five children’s families among vulnerable as per existing social protection
system.

Beneficiary registration
While some of the in-kind assistance and services will be provided at evacuation sites based on the above criteria, the only
way of ensuring that multi-purpose and sector-specific cash and certain in-kind assistance can be distributed to those in
need in the very short window of opportunity prior to the onset of the flooding is by pre-registering households in advance.
•

•

•

•

WFP: WFP will rely on its existing SCOPE database of beneficiaries. Verification and validation of the beneficiary
data will be conducted in the preparedness phase, jointly with local governments and cooperating partners.
Households will be identified using the community-based targeting guideline endorsed by respective Local
Governments. 22,624 HHs (beneficiaries) are already registered, and the verification process is expected to be
completed no later than 30 June, 2024. Beneficiaries that are not registered yet meet the targeting criteria in the
selected areas will be registered jointly with local governments and cooperating partners.
UNICEF: UNICEF in collaboration with local governments has prepared and updated household data and bank
details of those living with high flood risks using updated government social protection registry. Beneficiaries' data
is expected to complete no later than 8 July 2024.
UNFPA: UNFPA will rely on the WFP database under the data sharing agreement. Additionally, based on need
and selection criteria, UNFPA will collaborate with local government to identify beneficiaries, particularly GBV
survivors who may not be registered.
FAO: FAO will utilize the WFP database for four municipalities (Chhinnamasta Rural Municipality and Hanuman
Nagar Kankalini municipality of Saptari district, and Barahchhetra municipality and Harinagar Rural Municipality of
Sunsari district) in accordance with a data sharing agreement. Similarly, FAO will rely on the updated database of
UNICEF for Tilathikoiladi municipality in Saptari district. The database will be further verified and validated with the
local government and partner to ensure farming households eligible to receive the support are targeted.

Data sharing
In addition, agencies have agreed to share beneficiary information to be able to provide multi-sectoral assistance to the
most vulnerable households. The following data-sharing agreements are in place: WFP will share their data with UNICEF,
UNFPA and FAO. UNICEF will facilitate access to beneficiary data for FAO for the municipality of Tilathi Koiladi in Saptari
District.

United Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
www.unocha.org

OCHA | 13

Multi-purpose digital cash payments
Two UN agencies will distribute multi-purpose cash, targeting different municipalities. The transfer value for households will
be the same (15,000 rupees per household), though the transfer modalities vary based on the agencies’ pre-existing
capabilities and operations. The transfer value was developed by the cash coordination group, and is equivalent to 80% of
a 30-day minimum expenditure basket for a family of 5:
•

WFP: WFP will rely on the remittance model, considering the operational challenges of delivering assistance within
the short window of opportunity, beneficiary access to remittance agents and overall procedure for claiming the
entitlement by beneficiaries. With this modality, WFP uses a pre-existing agreement with Western Union (WU) that
has a wide network of remittance agents across the intervention areas. The previously foreseen domestic
remittance option is no longer available due to change in the government’s regulations. Additionally, Reasonable
Accommodation (RA) will be ensured to access entitlement based on the RA requests received from the needy
beneficiaries, particularly from persons with disabilities, pregnant and breastfeeding women and girls, and elderly.
Once the action trigger is reached, beneficiaries will receive a transaction reference number / slip in order to claim
their entitlement at the nearest remittance agent. Early warning messages, as well as notifications from local
authorities and cooperating partners will complement the message from the financial service provider (FSP).

•

UNICEF: UNICEF will engage with local governments in implementing the readiness and action trigger activities
and draw the lessons to institutionalize this framework. UNICEF will transfer funds to the local government’s bank
account once the readiness trigger is reached. The local government will then authorize the banks to deposit the
cash into the bank accounts of the targeted households immediately after the action trigger is reached. A SMS will
be sent to the beneficiaries informing that they will be receiving multipurpose cash and a second SMS when the
cash is deposited into their account. A small percentage of households who do not have bank accounts will be
receiving the cash support through cash camps to be managed by the local governments.

Ensuring readiness for a timely implementation
All agencies participating in this framework confirm their readiness to implement activities as soon as a trigger is reached.
Agency-specific preparedness plans are outlined below,
UNFPA
UNFPA Nepal has experience in emergency preparedness and humanitarian response, helping the identification of risks
and the implementation of anticipatory actions. UNFPA has a sub-national presence with provincial offices in Province-1,
2, Lumbini, and Sudurpaschim. Collaborations with longstanding partners such as the Nepal Red Cross Society (NRCS)
and Women’s Rehabilitation Centre (WOREC) ensure swift mobilization of early action efforts in gender-based violence
(GBV) and humanitarian response sectors during crises. Furthermore, UNFPA has strategically positioned emergency
supplies in six different locations and maintains long-term standby agreements with vendors for immediate procurement of
essential kits. Collaboration with federal, provincial, and local governments, alongside district disaster management
committees and implementing partners, underscores UNFPA’s commitment to preparedness and response efforts. Through
its provincial offices and implementing partners, UNFPA completes a range of preparedness activities ahead of triggers and
establishes necessary operational arrangements for early action.
UNICEF
UNICEF has a long history of working in emergency preparedness and humanitarian contexts, with all three tiers of
government and humanitarian partners at different levels from federal to local levels including local NGOs with whom
UNICEF has a long-standing partnership. UNICEF has prepositioned emergency supplies including WASH sector for
approximately 10,000 households in five strategic locations of the country, one of those, nearby to the east river basin which
is part of this programme. In addition, UNICEF will also preposition supplies with local NGO for targeted municipalities under
the CERF AA once the readiness trigger activates. UNICEF maintains a roster of psycho-social counsellors who could be
quickly deployed in the project locations upon readiness trigger and or action trigger.
FAO
Since 2015, FAO has been dedicated to developing anticipatory action capacities globally, regionally, and at the country
level. Specifically in Asia, FAO has implemented anticipatory action through the activation of protocols in countries such as
Bangladesh, Mongolia, the Philippines, and Viet Nam, accompanied by return-on-investment studies to gather evidence.
United Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
www.unocha.org

OCHA | 14

Since 2023, FAO has been actively investing in and contributing to the anticipatory action realm in Nepal, leveraging insights
from these experiences in the Asia-Pacific region. FAO is collaborating with DPNet, Agriculture knowledge centers and
rural municipalities along with the PUNOs to timely implement and deliver the planned activities during readiness and action
phase. FAO has already prepositioned the supplies like grain and seeds storage bags to cover 5000 households that will
be prepositioned and mobilized during the readiness and action phase respectively for the CERF AA for Koshi river basin.
Likewise, FAO will be disseminating risks communication messages in agriculture, livestock and fisheries to protect the
agricultural livelihoods of the farming communities at risk of floods.
WFP
The overall intervention design reflects WFP’s experiences with anticipatory action approaches gathered since 2015, as
well as lessons learnt from the 2022 anticipatory cash intervention in Lumbini and Sudur-Paschim provinces. This has
enabled identification of key risks, challenges and corresponding mitigation/ prevention measures to ensure timely
implementation of the proposed anticipatory intervention. A number of preparatory activities need to be conducted before
the triggers are reached, covering policy/guidelines around anticipatory interventions, institutional set up and
operational/institutional arrangements. The implementation of anticipatory cash assistance at scale requires close
coordination with local governments, and cooperating partners with extensive experience in disaster response. WFP has
been working with the SEBAC and NEEDS Nepal, the proposed cooperating partner for the implementation of the
anticipatory action plan, and with relevant government agencies at municipal, district, provincial and federal level to facilitate
this process. The cooperation includes the policy/ guideline framework, SOPs for anticipatory cash assistance, early
warning dissemination protocols, verification of beneficiaries, distribution plan and monitoring & evaluation. Operational
arrangements critical for implementation of anticipatory cash intervention and early warning dissemination that need to be
conducted before the trigger is met include a range of activities related to consolidation of beneficiary lists. This includes
verification of beneficiary data for the beneficiaries that are already included in the SCOPE database, and possible
registration of additional beneficiaries in the selected areas in case these beneficiaries meet the pre-determined criteria.
The community-based targeting guideline has been endorsed across the Local Governments to facilitate targeting process
through direct engagement of community disaster management committee in the selection, verification and prioritization
process. As part of WFP’s technical assistance to the Local Governments, WFP has been supporting in setting-up predisaster risk assessment tools to introduce impact-based forecasting and warning services for identifying cluster-specific
needs and design of pre-emptive actions including activation of AA-based contingency plans. These activities will be done
by the cooperating partners jointly with the municipal governments.

Lessons from previous activations
WFP
WFP has prior experience of delivering anticipatory action / forecast-based financing in Nepal. WFP has identified the
following lessons:
•
•
•
•
•

•

•

Weather forecasting has its inherent level of uncertainty, highlighting the importance of the “no regrets” principle for
anticipatory approaches.
A suitable cash transfer mechanism is critical to ensure the effectiveness of anticipatory cash assistance.
Government engagement at all levels is essential along with other DRR stakeholders to ensure enabling
environment for anticipatory approaches.
Further advocacy around the benefits of anticipatory approaches at the local level would benefit the overall adoption
of anticipatory approaches at scale and as a sustainable DRR approach.
Standby agreements with Financial Service Partners with well-advance information sharing of objectives and
expected outcomes largely overcome the hurdle in delivering cash. However, limited human and technical
resources in the field of FSPs presented major challenges. Without support from Cooperating Partners in registering
‘Know-Your-Customer’ forms and active engagement of local government, including physical presence of staffs
and provision items such as camera, photocopy machine, timely registration and withdrawal of cash assistance
would not have been feasible.
Timely issuance of Letter of Authorization with pre-deposits of cash in FSP’s bank account is imperative as cash
transfer between implementing agency and FSP takes around maximum 24 hours. In anticipatory cash assistance,
each hour counts in transferring the cash to beneficiaries and making its use in purchasing essential items.
Possible arrangements of multiple banking institutions in the implementing site is critical as it determines the
success of cash transfers to beneficiaries with limited human resources of banking institutions. As Banke had only
one bank, the days required for cash transfer to successfully meet the beneficiaries number was challenging and

United Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
www.unocha.org

OCHA | 15

•
•

thus distribution plan with engagement of banks started earlier and continued late. For Bardiya, three banks were
available and thus, beneficiaries collected cash assistance without major problems.
Availability of common database of potential beneficiaries that could be used to select household based on prespecified targeting criteria.
False alarms further amplify the challenges.

UNFPA
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

Coordinating with all levels of government and like-minded organizations during preparedness to ensure
smooth implementation of early actions.
Advocating to all levels of government for anticipatory action approaches based on no-regret principles.
Conducting a comprehensive household assessment with essential information to identify the most vulnerable
and at-risk populations.
Recognizing the risk of false alarms that may hinder early action efforts.
Identifying female community health volunteers and Community Psychosocial workers during the preparedness
phase and providing immediate orientation after readiness/action triggers to enhance rapid community
outreach.
Prepositioning items in strategic locations to ensure timely delivery of services to at-risk populations.
Joint review with municipality authorities, UN agencies, and implementing partners to address bottlenecks.
Mobilization of community psychosocial counsellors were found to be effective in providing psychosocial first
aid.
Update and dissemination of GBV referral pathways significantly enhanced the information on GBV prevention
and response.

United Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
www.unocha.org

OCHA | 16

5. Pre-agreed Financing
CERF
The UN humanitarian chief agreed to allocate up to $140 million from the UN’s Central Emergency Response Fund (CERF)
to support a series of anticipatory action frameworks.6 For this revised anticipatory action framework in Nepal, the ERC has
agreed to allocate up to $6.5 million if triggers are reached. Further details can be found in the CERF application documents.
CERF will disburse funds once three conditions are met:
•
•
•

Endorsement by the relevant Resident/Humanitarian Coordinator of the country-specific Anticipatory Action
framework and the CERF application package; and
Endorsement by the Emergency Relief Coordinator of the country-specific Anticipatory Action framework and the
CERF application package comprising an application chapeau; and
Activation of the pre-agreed readiness trigger or action trigger until the end of the 2024 monsoon season

CERF will disburse funds on a no-regrets basis as soon as either the readiness trigger or the action trigger is reached.
While a portion of the fund can be used immediately upon disbursement for readiness activities, the remaining portion of
the funding can only be used if and when an action trigger is reached. The amount of funding for readiness vs action
activities will be clearly defined in the pre-approved project proposals and budget. The need to distinguish between these
two cost categories in advance is important given the different potential scenarios:
•
•
•
•
•

Scenario A: all-systems go (readiness trigger followed a few days later by an action trigger)
Scenario B: false alarm (readiness trigger, but no action trigger)
Scenario B-2: false alarm, followed by readiness + action trigger within a maximum of 6 months
Scenario C: action trigger, but no readiness trigger.
Scenario D: no activation at all

Other donors
This framework for anticipatory action is not limited to CERF-funded activities. WFP will use resources mobilized through
its internal trust fund for anticipatory cash transfers in a district not targeted by this anticipatory action pilot (Panchthar,
Jhapa and Banke district). The same trigger mechanism and targeting criteria as proposed for the CERF-funded anticipatory
action will be used, with a view to transfer anticipatory cash assistance to around 2,600 households.
UNICEF is planning to expand the blockchain modality while implementing the AA framework and other emergency cash
responses.

6

Agency

CERF funding (in
US$)

Preparedness cofunding (in US$)

Implementation cofunding (in US$)

Total (in US$)

FAO

350,000

80,000

-

430,000

UNFPA

1,261,000

320,000

-

1,581,000

UNICEF

899,000

-

100,000

999,000

WFP

3,623,000

250,000

320,000

4,193,000

6,133,000

650,000

420,000

7,203,000

https://www.unocha.org/story/un-humanitarian-chief-release-140m-cerf-funds-anticipatory-action-projects
United Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
www.unocha.org

OCHA | 17

6. Learning
Monitoring & Evaluation
Each agency will use its existing monitoring & evaluation systems to collect and track data on implementation progress
and outputs achieved. This can be financed through the CERF funds. All findings will be shared.
In addition, a joint Post Distribution Monitoring (PDM) will be conducted by third-party under the leadership of WFP on
behalf of all participating agencies in case of a full framework activation in 2024. An independent research firm will be
selected to undertake the evaluation after the action trigger is reached. All agencies agreed to share beneficiary data,
within existing regulations, and commit to providing relevant inputs to support the PDM. The final PDM report along with
data will be made available to all framework partners. The PDM will be done in close coordination and communication
with participating agencies.

United Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
www.unocha.org

