Anticipatory Action Framework

Bangladesh Monsoon Floods – 2023 Version
Approved by the Resident Coordinator on 3 August 2023
Endorsed by the USG/ERC OCHA on 14 August 2023 (contacts updated in May 2024)

Introduction
In January 2023, the Under-Secretary-General and Emergency Relief Coordinator (USG/ERC) granted a
request by Resident Coordinator in Bangladesh to continue OCHA’s support in facilitating and financing
coordinated anticipatory action in line with the HCTT strategy to increase the geographic reach and to expand
to other hazards.
Extensive anticipatory action experience has been built over the past few years in Bangladesh for a variety of
hazards. Regarding monsoon river floods, the Bangladesh Red Crescent Society (BDRCS) pioneered the
approach in 2015, developing trigger-thresholds and Early Action Protocol (EAP). A previous coordinated
anticipatory action framework triggered in 2020 which yielded extensive learning and evaluations providing a
basis for the improvement of the framework ever since.1 Furthermore, an Anticipatory Action Technical
Working Group exists within the HCTT structure, complementing a government-led group. This framework is
also a contribution to the United Nations Secretary-General’s Early Warning for All initiative (EW4All). 2
This framework for coordinated anticipatory action for monsoon floods in Bangladesh is based on previous
experience, expanding the reach in the Jamuna River basin and adding the Padma River basin to be covered.

Risk/Hazard
Bangladesh is highly vulnerable to climate-related shocks and stresses, including monsoon flooding 3 events.
Monsoon floods usually occur April to September with peaks between June and September. In an ‘average’
year, approximately one quarter of the country is inundated. Every four to five years, there is a very severe
flood, with climate change changing the predictability and severity of these events.
With the support of the Government, Bangladeshi society has developed a remarkable level of resilience and
adaptation to seasonal flooding. However, in some years, flooding is more intense and surpasses the ability of
communities to cope, leading to deaths and the destruction of key infrastructure, livelihoods, and homes. This
in turn creates widespread humanitarian needs with longer term development consequences.
At a later stage, the framework will also include anticipatory action for cyclones which usually occur May to
June and October to November.

Anticipatory action
By using early warning systems and scientific advances in predicting disasters, anticipatory action maximizes
the window of opportunity between the moment of prediction and the arrival of a forecasted shock to trigger
interventions that prevent or mitigate imminent humanitarian impacts.
Anticipatory action is defined as acting ahead of predicted hazards to prevent or reduce acute humanitarian
impacts before they fully unfold. Anticipatory action works best if triggers and decision-making rules (the
model) and activities (the delivery) are pre-agreed to guarantee the fast release of pre-arranged financing (the
money).

1

For an entry point to the learning outcomes, please see here: https://www.unocha.org/our-work/humanitarian-financing/anticipatoryaction/summary-bangladesh-pilot
2
https://public.wmo.int/en/earlywarningsforall
3

In its National Adaptation Plan (NAP), Bangladesh identifies river flooding as a major challenge. Due to climate change, the mean
annual flow of the Ganges, Brahmaputra and Meghna River basins will substantially increase, especially during the pre-monsoon season
water flow. In the NAP, the government outlines the aim to protect lives and livelihoods against water-related disasters, for instance
through ad hoc cash transfers; emergency medication; and providing communities with readily understandable warning advisory services
to reduce losses and damages from sudden disasters. The plan further suggests focusing especially on women, people with diverse
gender identities, persons with disabilities.

In line with best practices for anticipatory action, this framework pre-agrees the forecasting trigger and the
activities which are complemented by re-arranged financing. In addition, documenting evidence, monitoring
and learning is part of the framework.

The Model: Forecasts, triggers, and activation protocol
Forecasts
The delivery of anticipatory action is time critical. The framework uses available forecasts with a two-step
trigger system to predict severe monsoon floods. A probabilistic warning model based on GloFAS, a global
hydrological forecast and monitoring system that couples weather forecasts with a hydrological model,
provides a readiness warning. A deterministic action model based on the Bangladesh Flood Forecasting &
Warning Center (FFCW) provides the final action warning.

Triggers
A trigger for anticipatory action should be based on a set of criteria to help answer the questions when and
where to act before an imminent disaster. It should determine when a hazard becomes an out-of-the-ordinary
(or severe) shock, and the humanitarian impact crosses a certain threshold for the exposed vulnerable
community. A 1 in 5-year return period or more is considered a severe shock. Such shocks are forecasted to
affect more than 40% of a population and/or damage more than 20% of household assets.
Trigger
Readiness
trigger

Action
trigger

Jamuna River
Readiness trigger is reached when the water
discharge at the Bahadurabad gauging
station over a period of three consecutive
days is forecasted by the GloFAS model with
a maximum 15-day lead time to be more than
50% likely to cross the 1-in-5-year return
period.
Action trigger is reached when the water level
at Bahadurabad is forecasted by the FFWC
5-day lead time model to cross the
government-defined “Danger Level” + 0.85
meters, and probabilistic forecasts with
longer lead times (GloFAS/RIMES) show a
sustained or increasing trend of the water
discharge at the Bahadurabad gauging
station for at least three consecutive days
beginning from the day when the danger
level is forecast to be crossed.

Padma River
Readiness trigger is reached when the water
discharge at the Baruria transit near
Goalando station over a period of three
consecutive days is forecasted by the
GloFAS model with a 12 to 15-day lead time
to be more than 50% likely to cross the 1-in5-year return period.
Action trigger is reached when the water level
at Mawa station is forecasted by the FFWC
5-day lead time model with a 3 to 5-day lead
time to cross the 1-in-5-year return period
(“Danger Level” + 0.5 meters), and
probabilistic forecasts with longer lead times
(GloFAS/RIMES) show a sustained or
increasing trend of the water discharge at the
Baruria transit for at least three consecutive
days beginning from the day when the
danger level is forecast to be crossed.

To support the geographic prioritization, an intervention map will be produced, to identify the unions where the
forecasted flood impact crosses the limit. This map builds on the flood depth and population data.

Activation protocol
Who
BDRCS-led
forecast
monitoring
team
(Hassan)
BDRCS-led
forecast
monitoring

What

How

When

Monitors flood forecasts (GLOFAS
and FFWC)

Populates (twice a day) the forecast
and observation in the log sheet4

From June

Confirms that 15-day readiness trigger
is reached

Communicates status of 15-day
readiness and/or 5-day action
trigger to the RC/RCO as well as
concerned UN Agencies, OCHA

As triggers
are
reached

And/or 5-day action trigger is reached
4

Jamuna file: https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/13ZZT16susCEjsCLHIDOjtYA-A0_r2bnD/edit#gid=705641025
Padma file: https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1r3CzPFA1yRK1x3bN90UfWEsAKZ2FmkgH/edit#gid=1017991757

team
(Hassan)
Agreed interventions by agencies can
commence immediately

CERF

RC/RCO

When a readiness trigger is issued (or
an action trigger without a previous
readiness trigger), CERF will
immediately send the approval letters
to the agencies.
The Resident Coordinator may call for
a meeting. Invitees include the
BDRCS-led technical working group
on anticipatory action, Red Cross/Red
Crescent, BDRCS, WFP, FAO,
UNFPA, UNICEF, OCHA and
government (e.g. MoDMR)
immediately after the readiness or
action trigger is reached.

and other partners (See annex)
through email. A WhatsApp Group
is also used to facilitate
communication.
The communication includes an
intervention map.
Endorsed framework and CERF
application by RC and Emergency
Relief Coordinator (ERC)
Pre-approved CERF approval letter
This meeting is to discuss the
situation, including coordination of
actions with government efforts. It is
not to discuss whether the
framework should be activated.

As
applicable

To support the geographic prioritization, an intervention map may be produced after a trigger event, to identify
the Unions where the forecasted flood impact crosses the limit. A priority list of areas is included in the annex.
This map builds on the flood depth and population data.
Draft email correspondence is found in the annex.

Improvements since 2020 and challenges
•
•

•

•

Expansion of the monsoon flooding forecast and triggers for coordinated anticipatory action in the Padma
River basin.5
Readiness trigger skill level and lead time. An update of GloFAS (from version 2.2 to 3.1) 6 improved the
performance of the readiness trigger. For the Jamuna trigger, this means against historic data, the number
of successful pre-activations increases twofold, while there are fewer false activations and missed
activations. The update also allowed a 15-day instead of 10-day readiness to be applied to the framework.7
The water level forecast from FFWC has been shown to have a negative bias (underprediction) at longer
lead times and high-water levels, which could lead to missed action triggers. A collaboration with FFWC is
ongoing to further improve the action trigger.
More river basins may still be covered by anticipatory action for monsoon river flooding. Discussions
continue on refining triggers according to scale of predicted disasters and how localized triggers might work
for a coordinated anticipatory action framework.

The Delivery: Activities to mitigate the impact of monsoon river flooding
Overview
Due to a lack of resilience, early warning, and resources available before a flood strikes, poor households in
the Jamuna and Padma basin might lose their lives, houses, access to WASH, assets, food grains, and
income from livestock. They may also be forced to adopt negative coping strategies, skip meals, reduce
portion size, eat lower quality food, and resort to unsafe water and sanitation. Women and girls often struggle
to meet essential material needs during a crisis, that leads to compromising on health, limited mobility,
5

For a technical analysis of the Padma forecast and trigger mechanism, see

https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/1RoEsN9MPi9c56sKL3ocebX8MaIXciOUTZnWlNS3my1E/edit#slide=id.g25032eae9db_0_9
6

For more information on the GLOFAS update, see here: https://www.globalfloods.eu/news/92-glofas-v31-pre-release-on-15042021/
For more information about the analysis conducted for both skill level and lead time improvement of the readiness trigger, please see
here:
https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/16Lgo9zUgiLv4VEg_QCAhtcdQmKkwoNR68CpEIPmxqsA/edit?usp=sharing
7

isolation, and they end up at greater risk of gender-based violence. Evidence from past emergencies
demonstrates that the menstrual health of adolescent girls worsens during crises. All these impacts can have
long-term impacts on communities, and both exacerbate susceptibly to future shocks and erode development
gains.
Anticipatory actions aim to interrupt the severity of a shock – in this case the flood impact – on vulnerable
households by targeting populations most at risk. Anticipatory actions are effective in preventing or reducing
the humanitarian impact of severe floods thus need to be delivered within the window of opportunity, i.e.
between the trigger and the peak impact of the flood waters.
Agencies thus need the operational capacity (thematic, logistic, administrative, financial, human resources) to
implement the action effectively. However, it is critical to understand that the exact timing of flooding for any
particular village or area is determined by a complex series of factors, including the collapse of embankments,
localized rain events, and other factors that are outside the scope of the model.

Activities8
The delivery of anticipatory action is time critical. Given the short lead times, unconditional cash is a major
component of the framework. Bringing together the reach of WFP and BDRCS, households will receive 4,500
Taka each, either through mobile transfers (bKash) or the post office. WFP will implement the last-mile early
warning dissemination framework developed with MoDMR and DDM which will ensure the dissemination of
the flood early warning to the flood affected remote villages.
In addition to cash, FAO will support households with (1) animal feed at evacuation points and (2) with floodproof storage of agricultural and productive assets (e.g. tools, seeds).
UNICEF is complementing the anticipatory intervention with the provision of safe drinking water and early
warning and hygiene promotion messaging through the distribution of jerricans, water purification tablets and
a communication campaign. Also, through the deployment of mobile water treatment units at evacuation
points to provide access safe drinking water. These activities aim to minimize the risk of water borne diseases
among the flood affected population through community awareness and distribution of prepositioned WASH
supplies at evacuation points. This anticipatory action will better protect vulnerable people by interrupting the
severity of the floods and will maximize the impact of life-saving interventions.
UNFPA-led interventions will reach women, adolescent girls and transgender with dignity and menstrual
hygiene management kits and cash and voucher assistance. Among these target groups, individuals who are
heightened risks of protection cash support will be provided. At community level, UNFPA will deploy Women’s
protection volunteers (WPV) who would provide contextualized information on lifesaving services including
access to shelter information. Menstrual hygiene items for adolescent girls through voucher will be piloted in
one location. Pregnant women with delivery date around monsoon peak time will receive baby kits to ensure
clean baby care supplies immediately after delivery and additional cash support to facilitate institutional
delivery. At the same time, mobile camps will provide SRH services including antenatal care. Health centers
will be equipped with supplies for basic and comprehensive emergency obstetric care.
BDRCS under its Flood EAP, will take some major anticipatory actions i.e., Unconditional cash grant to 4,200
families through cash transfer, Evacuation transportation by boat to 200 families, Early warning dissemination
for early action (approx. 50,000 people), provide basic first aid support. In addition to cash, BDRCS through a
sub-agreement with WFP, will provide additional evacuation support based on need, last mile early warning
dissemination and first aid support based on need of the people and households during the operations.
Save the Children, using its own financing, will provide direct cash and WASH support along with evacuating
people from remote char, and dissemination of child-friendly flood preparedness & early action messages in
the Gaibanda district. These interventions will cover some 5,000 families, including 700 families with direct
cash.
NB: The Start Fund Bangladesh has been actively participating in the development of this framework. For its
anticipatory actions, the Start Fund Bangladesh is however using separate threshold for its Flood DRF i.e., 1 in
5-year return period of flood for its threshold where it will consider 10 days forecasting having with a probability
8

For a detailed description of UN activities see the relevant CERF projects: cerf.un.org.

of more than 70% confidence at district level for at least three days. The Start Fund Bangladesh has prearranged US$750,000 for this trigger for cash distribution and other sectoral interventions. Another $600,000
are pre-arranged for cyclones.

Collective improvements
Expanding geographic scope and numbers of
people covered
A major improvement in the 2023 edition is the
expansion to additional geographic areas. In addition
to the 5 districts in the Jamuna River basin (Bogra,
Jamalpur, Gaibandha, and Kurigram, the framework
now includes 3 more districts in the Padma River
basin (Madaripur, Manikganj, and Shariatpur). In
total, some 38 Upzilas are covered. In the selection
of the additional districts, a combination of forecast
skills, flood risk, inform vulnerability and
implementation capacity was considered. 9
The potential reach will thus increase by some
20,000 households (or 100,000 people) to a
combined 150,000 households. In addition, a million
people are estimated to be reached with early
warning messages.

Joint targeting and common beneficiary database
The 2020 experience showed that despite multi-sectoral actions by humanitarian agencies in the same
geographic area, most households did not receive multi-sectoral support. Where there was an overlap, the
independent evaluations indicate that beneficiaries saw better outcomes.
Thus in 2021, a common beneficiary database for joint targeting at the household level was developed. This
entails the establishment in advance of a common database of pre-verified, poor, and vulnerable households
from the most flood-prone unions in the geographic target area of the framework. Partners continue working
through challenges in the full utilization of the database, including through necessary joint verification and data
sharing agreements.

Joint approach to early warning
A lack of coordinated early warning mechanism and messaging, especially to reach the most flood prone
unions, has been identified in 2020 as a major challenge. Thus, in order to improve the quality and reach of
early warning, messages are now jointly developed and tested.
Dissemination is also coordinated, WFP for instance will be complementing the government’s existing flood
early warning system which reaches up to union level – through community or last mile dissemination to
remote villages to raise awareness of possible impacts of floods on life and livelihoods in advance. This last
mile early warning system may use community volunteers, announcement from local mosques, community
radio or local TV cable network including the text messaging. FAO will use SMS blasts to disseminate the
common messages to warn some households with targeted early warning messaging.

Localization and collaboration with the government
An anticipatory approach to humanitarian action allows for partnerships, especially with local actors, to be well
defined in advance of the triggers and shocks. Once a trigger occurs, the pre-identified partnerships allow for
a timely implementation of response which clear roles, responsibilities, and expectations.
BDRCS, CARE, Save the Children and The Start Fund Bangladesh participated in the development of the
framework and provided support and advice, including on the localization agenda.

9

https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1VZcZmZ82sGVIjNCRcsW0VwZkXRB1Kamx/edit#gid=1336001525

Through CERF financing alone, UN agencies are working with several local partners to implement the
anticipatory actions.
The establishment of the MoDMR-led Forecast Based Financing/Action Task Force highlights the
Government’s appreciation for the anticipatory approach and its willingness to lead in its further development.
UN agencies work closely with the MoDMR and relevant government line ministries and departments. FAO,
UNFPA and UNICEF will also provide resources to government staff and departments for carrying out
anticipatory actions. Work is also ongoing to provide support to FFWC on trigger-related improvements.

Challenges
Challenges remain over limited capacity and systems in place in all regions of Bangladesh to carry out
anticipatory action at scale. In addition, the common beneficiary database, while an improvement, still faces
various constraints. Furthermore, community engagement and AAP should be strengthened.

The Money: Pre-arranged financing
Pre-arranged finance to fuel anticipatory action is critical, especially in sudden onset disasters, to enable
timely, effective anticipatory action. A key recommendation from the USG/ERC was to find co-financing for
coordinated anticipatory action in Bangladesh so as to ensure available funding is mutually reenforcing. Of
course, partner agencies invest considerable resources in building coordinated anticipatory action, but also for
preparedness already.
This framework for anticipatory action is not limited to CERF-funded activities. There are various other pooled
funds, bilateral donors and UN agencies’ internal reserve funds that can, within their own established criteria
and in complementarity, finance part of the collective approach when the need arises. Currently, WFP, FAO
and UNFPA have been able to secure additional funds.

Options for pre-arranging funds against hazards
A major decision by agencies was to allocate the available financing against the three hazards: Jamuna River,
Padma River and cyclones. To maximize potential reach, it was agreed to split the available funding
envelopes among the two river basins first. Should funding be left over due to no triggers being reached, that
funding would then be invested in the cyclone coordinated anticipatory action yet to be developed. It was also
agreed to engage in additional resource mobilization.

Financing overview

Excess finance
from
non-activated

Funding overview in US$ for coordinated framework
Jamuna
Padma
Cyclones
CERF
Agency
CERF
Agency
Total
WFP
4,300,000 2,300,000 1,200,000 100,000
7,900,000
FAO
586,541 500,000 195,640
1,282,181
UNICEF
385,349
165,028
550,377
UNFPA
925,536 315,000 111,347
1,351,883
BDRCS
414,760
414,760
Save
200,000
200,000
Total
6,197,426 3,729,760 1,672,015 100,000
11,699,201
Other anticipatory action with different triggers
Jamuna
Padma
Cyclones
Agency
Agency
START
750,000
600,000

Central Emergency Response Fund (CERF)
The Emergency Relief Coordinator agreed to allocate up to $7.5 million from CERF to support anticipatory
action in Bangladesh. CERF will disburse funds to anticipatory action frameworks on a no-regrets basis once
three conditions are met:
•

•

•

Endorsement by the relevant Resident/Humanitarian Coordinator of the Anticipatory Action framework (this
document) and the CERF application package comprising an application chapeau, agency-specific project
proposals and agency-specific budgets (in annex); and
Pre-approval by the Emergency Relief Coordinator of the Anticipatory Action framework (this document)
and the CERF application package comprising an application chapeau, agency-specific project proposals
and agency-specific budgets (in annex);
Activation of either the readiness trigger or the action trigger within a maximum of two years from the ERC’s
pre-approval of the framework.

CERF disbursement is guaranteed once a trigger is reached. 10 As the CERF funding will be activated and
distributed as automatically as possible immediately once the defined trigger(s) is/are reached. CERF will
disburse funds on a no-regrets basis. While a portion of the fund can be used immediately upon disbursement
for readiness activities, the remaining portion of the funding can only be used if and when an action trigger is
reached. The amount of funding for readiness vs action activities will be clearly defined in the pre-approved
project proposals and budget. The need to distinguish between these two cost categories in advance is
important given the different potential scenarios.
Pre-arrangement and/or receipt of CERF funding for anticipatory action does not preclude or guarantee
additional CERF funding for a complementary rapid response to save lives resulting from the same or other
shocks. This means that the pre-arranged funding by CERF for anticipatory action is for the hazards and
triggers outlined in this framework. Should there be additional needs or other disasters, CERF’s other funding
modalities can be requested.
Exact details on financing per agency can be found in the CERF application documents annexed.

Challenges
While financing is increasingly available to carry out anticipatory actions, collective anticipatory action requires
an investment in building the framework. These “start-up costs” (or “build costs” as part of a “build – fuel –
evaluate” cycle of frameworks) are incurred by participating agencies prior to the activation of a framework set
up effective anticipatory actions. These costs may also include projects which enable a collective approach (e.g.
common targeting approaches) and other costs that pooled funds, including the CERF, traditionally do not fund.

The Learning
Any activation of this framework will offer enhanced learning opportunities anticipatory action. An ad-hoc
learning, monitoring and evaluation committee will be convened by OCHA with partners to this framework to
coordinate learning and evidence gathering on anticipatory action.

10 CERF financing is released at a monsoon season’s first trigger of the readiness trigger. At this stage, agencies can use CERF funds to
cover agreed costs associated for readiness activities between the 15-day readiness trigger and the 5-day action trigger. Should there not
be any 5-day activation trigger by the end of the monsoon season, agencies will reimburse unspent funds. To enable this approach, each
CERF project will clearly state which activities happen before and after an action trigger, and each budget per agency will include which
activities are incurred for readiness and which costs are to be incurred after the action trigger. Of note, should there be no readiness trigger,
but only an action trigger, the framework would still be activated. CERF would disburse 100% of the funds as per the pre-agreed project
proposals. Agencies will do the utmost to deliver assistance as quickly as possible, but within the 15-day timeframe envisaged by the project
proposals. In practice, this means that some actions can no longer be carried out before peak flooding. This scenario would provide
additional learning opportunities to be discussed in the learning committee

One key aspect of learning will be to assess the impact of the framework against the premise of where possible,
anticipatory actions may lead to a faster, more efficient, and more dignified humanitarian response, which also
may protect development gains.
Learning from frameworks should be achieved at the highest possible standards and rigor.
While the ad-hoc committee will discuss the key learning questions in more detail, the following areas of learning
have been pre-identified as possible starting points designing M&E as well as an independent evaluation:
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

Timing: Did the timing of the intervention in relation to peak flood make a difference.
Joint targeting: Did the common beneficiary database and joint targeting lead to better assistance
provided to beneficiaries by agencies who used this modality?
Early warning: How effective is the joint approach to early warning? Did the content of the messages
matter?
Localization: Did the anticipatory approach enable greater localization of the humanitarian response?
Partnership: What can be learned from the partnership with the government, including how to support
a take-up of anticipatory approaches?
Actions: How can the anticipatory action by each agency be further improved?
Effectiveness: Was the AA found effective in reducing the impact of the shocks?
AAP: To what extent was the level of effective participation from communities ensured by the AA?

Monitoring & Evaluation
Each agency will use its existing monitoring & evaluation systems to collect and track data on implementation
progress and outputs achieved. This can be financed through the CERF funds. All findings will be shared with
OCHA. M&E questionnaires should be coordinated among agencies to allow for maximum learning, each to
evaluate and report on a set of common questions across all interventions. This may also enable a reduction of
interviews required by beneficiaries. The work will bring in MEAL experts at the global level and can draw on
recently published guidance to evaluate anticipatory action. 11 Further common questions can be discussed and
agreed through the ad-hoc committee.

Independent Evaluation
Agencies in the framework also agree to participate in an independent evaluation, such as the 2020 impact
evaluation. This may include the sharing of beneficiary data for this purpose. The ad hoc committee will oversee
this evaluation and define the scope of the exercise.

Final provisions
Advocacy and public communication
Agencies agree to coordinate, under the leadership of the Resident Coordinator, key messages around the
framework, including during the development, activation and learning phase.
In case of an activation of the framework, close coordination facilitated by OCHA will facilitate as a minimum: a
joint press release and mutual amplification of social media stories.
To enhance common messaging and advocacy for anticipatory action, agencies agree to share any visuals
(photos, videos) and impact stories with the ad hoc committee as these become available.

11

See for instance here: https://www.anticipation-hub.org/news/new-guidance-on-planning-and-monitoring-countrycapacity-strengthening-for-anticipatory-action

Annex – One page overview of framework
Jamuna River Basin
Reach
Districts
Trigger
Readiness
trigger

Action
trigger

Agency

Activity

WFP
FAO

Cash distribution
High-nutrient
animal feed;
Waterproof
storage silos
Jerrican and water
purification
tablets;
Mobile water
treatment plants
Dignity Kits and
cash support;
Menstrual health
management kits
and voucher
support; Baby
kits; Reproductive
health kits; SRH
mobile camps
Unconditional
cash grant,
Evacuation
transportation by
boat, Early
warning
dissemination for
early action
(evacuation
support),
Provision of basic
first aid support
Cash, WASH,
evacuation
support, and early
warning messages

UNICEF

UNFPA

BDRCS

Save

Padma River Basin

Bogra; Jamalpur; Gaibandha; Kurigram;
Sirajganj

Madaripur; Manikganj; Shariatpur

Readiness trigger is reached when the water
discharge at the Bahadurabad gauging station
over a period of three consecutive days is
forecasted by the GloFAS model with a
maximum 15-day lead time to be more than
50% likely to cross the 1-in-5-year return
period.
Action trigger is reached when the water level
at Bahadurabad is forecasted by the FFWC 5day lead time model to cross the governmentdefined “Danger Level” + 0.85 meters, and
probabilistic forecasts with longer lead times
(GloFAS/RIMES) show a sustained or increasing
trend of the water discharge at the
Bahadurabad gauging station for at least three
consecutive days beginning from the day when
the danger level is forecast to be crossed.

Readiness trigger is reached when the water
discharge at the Baruria transit near
Goalando station over a period of three
consecutive days is forecasted by the GloFAS
model with a 12 to 15-day lead time to be
more than 50% likely to cross the 1-in-5-year
return period.
Action trigger is reached when the water
level at Mawa station is forecasted by the
FFWC 5-day lead time model with a 3 to 5day lead time to cross the 1-in-5-year return
period (“Danger Level” + 0.5 meters), and
probabilistic forecasts with longer lead times
(GloFAS/RIMES) show a sustained or
increasing trend of the water discharge at
the Baruria transit for at least three
consecutive days beginning from the day
when the danger level is forecast to be
crossed.
People
CERF
Other
Targeted
Finance
finance
100,000
$1,200,00
$100,000
10,000
$195,640

People
Targeted
353,500
39,500

CERF Finance

Other finance

$4,300,000
$586,541

$2,300,000
$500,000

65,600

$385,349

19,920

$925,536

$315,000

70,000

$414,760

25,000

$200,000

24,600

$165,027

3,600

$111,347

Annex – DRAFT trigger messages
From: Hassan (RCCC)
To: Gwyn Lewis (Resident Coordinator) lewisg@un.org
Cc: valdes@un.org; domenico.scalpelli@wfp.org; simone.parchment@wfp.org; riccardo.suppo@wfp.org;
siddiqul-islam.khan@wfp.org; niger.dilnahar@wfp.org; urbe.secades@wfp.org; md.salauddin@fao.org;
blokhus@unfpa.org; watabe@unfpa.org; rkhan@unfpa.org; makhter@unfpa.org; loduma@unicef.org,
tshinohara@unicef.org, mkhatun@unicef.org; md.shahjahan@bdrcs.org; faiem.ahmed@grc-bangladesh.org;
sharif.khan@ifrc.org; Shofiul.Alam@startnetwork.org; ashraful.haque@startnetwork.org; anil.das@fao.org,
Md.Salauddin@fao.org; Bhaskar.Goswami@fao.org; towhidul.tarafder@savethechildren.org;
kazirabeya.ame@care.org; gilmand@un.org; jensen7@un.org; wittigj@un.org; pfisterd@un.org;
ioannis.kaffes@un.org; cerf@un.org; hassan.ahmadul@gmail.com
SUBJECT: Anticipatory action Bangladesh – Readiness trigger reached for [Jamuna/Padma]
[readiness trigger]

Dear Gwyn, dear colleagues,
[JAMUNA] The readiness trigger is reached as the discharge flow at the Bahadurabad gauging station over a
period of three consecutive days is forecasted by the GloFAS model with a maximum 15-day lead time to be
more than 50% likely to cross the 1-in-5-year return period water discharge value of 100,000 m3/s on [DATE]
and remain above to [date].
OR
[PADMA] The readiness trigger is reached as the water discharge at the Baruria transit near Goalando station
over a period of three consecutive days is forecasted by the GloFAS model with a 12 to 15-day lead time to be
more than 50% likely to cross the 1-in-5-year return period.
Details are attached.
Best wishes and good luck,
Hassan
----[action trigger]

SUBJECT: Anticipatory action – Action trigger reached for [Jamuna/Padma]
Dear Gwyn, dear colleagues,
[JAMUNA] As per the government flood forecasting warning centre (FFWC) forecast on [DATE], the action
trigger is reached as the water level at Bahadurabad is forecasted by the FFWC 5-day lead time deterministic
model to cross the government-defined “Danger Level” + 0.85 meters over a period of three consecutive days
from [DATE].
OR
[PADMA] As per the government flood forecasting warning centre (FFWC) forecast on [DATE], the action
trigger is reached as the water level at Mawa station is forecasted by the FFWC 5-day lead time model with a 3

to 5-day lead time to cross the 1-in-5-year return period (“Danger Level” + 0.5 meters), and probabilistic
forecasts with longer lead times (GloFAS/RIMES) show a sustained or increasing trend of the water discharge
at the Baruria transit for at least three consecutive days beginning from the day when the danger level is
forecast to be crossed.
[Any additional information on flood levels]
Further details are attached.
Best wishes and good luck,
Hassan

Annex - CERF Chapeau and project proposals (see cerf.un.org)

Annex – Priority intervention areas for coordinated anticipatory action
River basin
Padma
Padma
Padma
Padma
Padma
Padma
Jamuna
Jamuna
Jamuna
Jamuna
Jamuna
Jamuna
Jamuna
Jamuna
Jamuna
Jamuna
Jamuna
Jamuna
Jamuna
Jamuna
Jamuna
Jamuna
Jamuna
Jamuna
Jamuna
Jamuna
Jamuna
Jamuna
Jamuna
Jamuna
Jamuna
Jamuna
Jamuna
Jamuna
Jamuna
Jamuna
Jamuna
Jamuna

District
Madaripur
Manikganj
Manikganj
Shariatpur
Shariatpur
Shariatpur
Bogra
Bogra
Bogra
Jamalpur
Gaibandha
Gaibandha
Gaibandha
Gaibandha
Gaibandha
Gaibandha
Gaibandha
Jamalpur
Jamalpur
Jamalpur
Jamalpur
Jamalpur
Jamalpur
Kurigram
Kurigram
Kurigram
Kurigram
Kurigram
Kurigram
Kurigram
Kurigram
Sirajganj
Sirajganj
Sirajganj
Sirajganj
Sirajganj
Sirajganj
Sirajganj

Upazila
Shib Char
Harirampur
Shibalaya
Bhedarganj
Naria
Zanjira
Sonatola
Sariakandi
Dhunat
Islampur
Palashbari
Fulchhari
Sundarganj
Gaibandha Sadar
Gobindaganj
Sadullapur
Saghatta
Dewanganj
Bakshiganj
Sarishabari
Melandaha
Jamalpur Sadar
Madarganj
Raumari
Nageshwari
Bhurungamari
Ulipur
Rajarhat
Char Rajibpur
Chilmari
Kurigram Sadar
Shahjadpur
Belkuchi
Chauhali
Kazipur
Sirajganj Sadar
Royganj
Ullah Para

Adm3 Pcode
BD305487
BD305628
BD305678
BD308614
BD308665
BD308694
BD501095
BD501081
BD501027
BD453929
BD553267
BD553221
BD553291
BD553224
BD553230
BD553282
BD553288
BD453915
BD453907
BD453985
BD453961
BD453936
BD453958
BD554979
BD554961
BD554906
BD554994
BD554977
BD554908
BD554909
BD554952
BD508867
BD508811
BD508827
BD508850
BD508878
BD508861
BD508894

