UNITED
NATIONS                                                                                        A
                  General Assembly
                                                                       Distr.
                                                                       GENERAL

                                                                       A/51/950
                                                                       14 July 1997

                                                                       ORIGINAL: ENGLISH

Fifty-first session
Agenda item 168
United Nations reform: measures and
 proposals


           RENEWING THE UNITED NATIONS: A PROGRAMME FOR REFORM

                                Report of the Secretary-General




      The report comprises two parts. Part one contains an introduction, together with a
 thematic overview of the main reform elements. It highlights the new leadership and
 management structure the Secretary-General is instituting and summarizes the key sectoral
 measures he is taking and proposing to Member States.

       Part two includes a more detailed discussion of the entire set of reform measures, as
 well as fuller explanations and specific actions and recommendations.




97-18979 (E)                                                                                   /...
                                                -2-




                                 LETTER OF TRANSMITTAL

                                                                                     14 July 1997

Dear Mr. President:

       As you know, when I assumed the office of Secretary-General, I initiated a thorough
review of the activities of the United Nations and the manner in which they are organized and
conducted. The objective was to identify the ways in which the United Nations can more
effectively and efficiently meet the challenges that lie ahead as we enter a new century, and a
new millennium. Today, I am pleased to submit to you, and through you to this Assembly, wha
I believe to be the most extensive and far-reaching reforms in the fifty-two year history of this
Organization. They are contained in the attached report, entitled “Renewing the United Nations:
A Programme for Reform”.

       My concept of reform has been clear and consistent throughout: the Organization needs to
be significantly reconfigured in order to do better what the international community requires it to
do. Undertaking those changes will also realize significant administrative efficiencies, and thus
produce savings in many, though not necessarily all, instances. Those net efficiency savings, in
turn, should be made available to the Organization’s highest priority, alleviating poverty and
enhancing the prospects of developing countries. The measures and proposals outlined in the
attached report reflect these principles.

       The report includes three types of measures. The first are those that I can and will
undertake on my own initiative, concerning largely the organization and management of the
Secretariat, programmes, and funds. Here the report seeks nothing less than to transform the
leadership and management structure of the Organization, enabling it to act with greater unity of
purpose, coherence of efforts, and agility in responding to the many challenges it faces. These
measures are intended to renew the confidence of Member States in the relevance and
effectiveness of the Organization and revitalize the spirit and commitment of its staff.

       The success of this reform programme further requires close partnership and cooperation
with Member States, from whom the United Nations derives its mandates and is equipped with
resources. Hence, the report also includes complementary measures that reside within the
jurisdiction of Member States. It proposes ways to enhance the strategic direction that only the
General Assembly can provide to the work of the Organization, while the Secretary-General is
given the necessary tools to accomplish mandated objectives most effectively. I hope and trus
that the General Assembly at its fifty-second session will give prompt and serious consideration
to these proposals.

The President of the General Assembly
 of the United Nations

                                                                                                /...
                                                -3-




     Thirdly, several more fundamental proposals are advanced for consideration by the General
Assembly for possible action in the longer term.

       I wish to acknowledge with gratitude the important contributions made to this effort by the
Executive Coordinator for Reform, Mr. Maurice Strong, and his small but highly motivated team.
In a matter of just six months, and with very limited resources, they covered vast ground and
proved that it is possible for the United Nations to reform itself from within. Similarly, I wan
to thank the many other senior officials of the United Nations for giving so generously of their
scarce time, especially the members of the Reform Steering Committee. Finally, I am grateful to
the valuable suggestions I received throughout the process from Governments, as well as
institutions and individuals beyond the Secretariat, who all wish to see a vital role for the United
Nations in the century ahead.

      Please accept, Mr. President, the assurances of my highest consideration.




                                                                                    Kofi A. Annan




                                                                                                /...
                                               -4-




                                           CONTENTS

                                                                        Paragraphs   Page

Highlights                                                                            6

                                      Part One: Overview

   I.   Introduction                                                       1 - 25     9

  II.   Initiating change                                                 26 - 91    14

        A.   A new leadership and management structure                    27 - 61    14

             Strengthening leadership capacity in the Secretariat         34 - 39    16
             Enhancing strategic direction from the General Assembly      40 - 48    18
             Acting as one at the country level                           49 - 51    20
             Increasing administrative effectiveness and efficiencies     52 - 56    20
             Creating a dividend for development                          57 - 58    21
             Reaching out to civil society                                59 - 60    22
             Instilling a culture of communications                        61        22

        B.   Core activities                                              62 - 79    23

             Peace and security                                           63 - 67    23
             Economic and social affairs                                  68 - 71    24
             Development cooperation                                      72 - 75    24
             Humanitarian affairs                                         76 - 77    25
             Human rights                                                 78 - 79    26

        C.   The road ahead                                               80 - 91    26

 III.   A new United Nations for the new century                          92 - 95    29

                               Part Two: Measures and proposals

 IV.    New approaches to policy formulation                             97 - 103    32

  V.    Focusing on substantive priorities                               104 - 216   36

        A.   Peace, security and disarmament                             104 - 126   36


                                                                                          /...
                                               -5-




                                   CONTENTS (continued)

                                                                 Paragraphs   Page

       B.   Economic and social affairs                          127 - 145    42

       C.   Development cooperation                              146 - 169    49

       D.   Environment, habitat and sustainable development     170 - 179    56

       E.   Humanitarian affairs                                 180 - 193    59

       F.   Human rights                                         194 - 206    63

       G.   Civil society                                        207 - 216    66

 VI.   Enhancing support capacities                              217 - 271    69

       A.   Financing the organization                           217 - 222    69

       B.   Management                                           223 - 250    71

       C.   Communications and public information                251 - 262    82

       D.   United Nations University, research institutes and
            related bodies                                       263 - 271    85

VII.   Prepared for a changing world                             272 - 283    87

Annex. Examples of ongoing managerial reforms                                 91




                                                                                   /...
                                               -6-




                                           Highlights


        The measures and proposals set out in the present report encompass the reform
programme undertaken by the Secretary-General during his first six months in office. I
constitutes an extensive and far-reaching set of changes that will move the Organization firmly
along the road to major and fundamental reform designed to achieve greater unity of purpose,
coherence of effort and flexibility in response. Some measures have already been implemented;
others will take more time; and many require decisions by Member States. Reform is, after all,
a continuing process not a single event.

       The actions and recommendations focus primarily on the following priority areas:

        ♦ Establishment of a new leadership and management structure that will
strengthen the capacity of the Secretary-General to provide the leadership and ensure the
accountability that the Organization requires. Through:

            -    The establishment of the position of Deputy Secretary-General;

            -    The establishment of a Senior Management Group;

            -    Further development and strengthening of the Executive Committees of the
                 sectoral groups established by the Secretary-General in January 1997 which
                 include all the departments, funds and programmes of the United Nations;

            -    Decentralization of decision-making at the country level and consolidation of
                 the United Nations presence under “one flag”;

            -    Establishment of a Strategic Planning Unit.

       ♦ Assuring financial solvency through the establishment of a Revolving Credit Fund
of up to $1 billion, financed from voluntary contributions or other means Member States may
wish to suggest, pending a lasting solution of the Organization’s financial situation.

       ♦ Integration of twelve Secretariat entities and units into five, and proposed
consolidation of five intergovernmental bodies into two.

        ♦ A changed management culture accompanied by management and efficiency
measures, which will eliminate at least 1,000 staff posts, reduce administrative costs by one
third, improve performance and effect additional savings in terms of personnel and costs over
time.


                                                                                                 /...
                                                 -7-




        ♦ Instituting a thorough overhaul of human resources policies and practices to
ensure that all staff have the necessary skills and enjoy the requisite conditions for effective
service.

       ♦ Promoting sustained and sustainable development as a central priority of the
United Nations through:

            -    The grouping of United Nations funds and programmes with developmen
                 operations into a United Nations Development Group, which will facilitate
                 consolidation and cooperation amongst them without compromising their
                 distinctiveness or identity;

            -    Proposing a “development dividend” to shift resources from administration to
                 development activities;

            -    The establishment of a new Office of Development Financing with the Deputy
                 Secretary-General taking the lead in initiating innovative means of mobilizing
                 new financial resources for development;

            -    Proposals for burden-sharing and greater predictability through multi-year
                 negotiated and voluntary pledges for the financing of United Nations
                 development operations;

            -    Strengthening the environmental dimension of the United Nations activities,
                 particularly UNEP.

       ♦ Strengthening and focusing the normative, policy and knowledge-related
functions of the Secretariat and its capacity to serve the United Nations intergovernmental
bodies through the establishment of a consolidated Economic and Social Affairs sectoral group.

       ♦ Improving the Organization’s ability to deploy peacekeeping and other field
operations more rapidly, including by enhancing the rapid reaction capacity of the United
Nations.

       ♦ Strengthening the United Nations capacity for post-conflict peace-building with
the designation of the Department of Political Affairs as a focal point for this purpose.

       ♦ Bolstering international efforts to combat crime, drugs and terrorism by
consolidating United Nations programmes and activities in Vienna under an Office for Drug
Control and Crime Prevention.




                                                                                                   /...
                                                 -8-




        ♦ Extending human rights activities by reorganizing and restructuring the human
rights secretariat and the integration of human rights into all principal United Nations activities
and programmes.

        ♦ Advancing the disarmament agenda by establishing a Department for Disarmamen
and Arms Regulation to address reduction of armaments and weapons of mass destruction and
regulation of armaments.

        ♦ Enhancing response to humanitarian needs by setting up a new Emergency Relief
Coordination Office to replace the Department of Humanitarian Affairs and focusing its
capacities to deal more effectively with complex emergencies.

       ♦ Effecting a major shift in the public information and communications strategy and
functions of the United Nations to meet the changing needs of the Organization.

       ♦ Addressing the need for more fundamental change through recommendations by
the Secretary-General to Member States that they consider:

            -    Refocusing the work of the General Assembly on issues of highest priority and
                 reducing the length of the Assembly sessions;

            -    The establishment of a ministerial-level commission to examine the need for
                 fundamental change through review of the Charter of the United Nations and
                 the legal instruments from which the specialized agencies of the United Nations
                 derive their constitutions;

            -    Designation of the session of the General Assembly to be held in the year 2000
                 as “a Millennium Assembly” to focus on preparing the United Nations to mee
                 the major challenges and needs of the world community in the twenty-firs
                 century, accompanied by a companion “People’s Assembly”.




                                                                                                  /...
                                                -9-




                                   PART ONE: OVERVIEW


                                      I. INTRODUCTION

1.      The United Nations is a noble experiment in human cooperation. In a world that remains
divided by many and diverse interests and attributes, the United Nations strives to articulate an
inclusive vision: community among nations, common humanity among peoples, the singularity
of our only one Earth. Indeed, the historic mission of the United Nations is not merely to ac
upon, but also to expand the elements of common ground that exist among nations -- across
space to touch and improve more lives and over time to convey to future generations the
material and cultural heritage that we hold in trust for them. The Charter of the United Nations,
drafted with the searing experience of history’s two most destructive wars fresh in mind,
embraced each of these aspirations and provided institutional instruments for their pursuit.

2.     Fifty-two years after the signing of the Charter, the world can celebrate numerous
progressive changes in which the United Nations has played a significant part. The United
Nations role in decolonization began almost instantly and remains one of its grandes
achievements. The Universal Declaration of Human Rights soon celebrates its own fiftieth
anniversary. United Nations peacekeepers have helped to stabilize regional disputes and its
humanitarian missions have alleviated suffering throughout the world. The challenges faced by
developing countries have been at the forefront of United Nations economic activities.

3.      The smooth flow of international transactions is made possible by rules of the road
devised by the United Nations and its agencies. The world’s people are healthier and lead
longer and more productive lives thanks to the eradication of diseases, the improvement of
nutritional standards, the promotion of agricultural development, the campaigns for literacy and
the advocacy of the rights of women and children in which United Nations organizations have
featured prominently. And the United Nations has no peer among international organizations in
identifying novel issues on the policy horizon and devising plans of action for dealing with them,
including the environment, social development questions and such uncivil elements in global
civil society as drug-trafficking, transnational criminal networks and terrorism.

4.     At the same time, there remains a sizeable gap between aspiration and accomplishment.
Despite the unprecedented prosperity that technological advances and the globalization of
production and finance have brought to many countries, neither Governments, nor the United
Nations, nor the private sector have found the key to eradicating the persistent poverty that grips
the majority of humankind. Indeed, imbalances in the world economy today pose serious
challenges to future international stability: imbalances in the distribution of wealth, between the
forces driving economic integration and political fragmentation, between humanity’s impact on,
and the capacities of, planetary life-support systems.


                                                                                                 /...
                                                 -10-




5.      Moreover, disintegrative forces, abetted by inequities and intolerance, continue to tear
nations and peoples apart, while virulent conflicts, fuelled by prejudice, deprivation and
sometimes outright anarchy, defy both national borders and international norms. Such
instabilities have spurred an enormous proliferation of ever-more lethal weapons and growing
humanitarian crisis. Massive violations of human rights continue to be committed and large
numbers of people continue to be killed for no reason other than their identity or beliefs. The
ranks of refugees and displaced people -- largely innocent victims caught up in political
upheavals of historic proportions -- have swelled to over 25 million.

6.      The fundamental objective of this reform effort is to narrow the gap between aspiration
and accomplishment. It seeks to do so by establishing a new leadership culture and managemen
structure at the United Nations that will lead to greater unity of purpose, coherence of efforts and
agility in responding to the pressing needs of the international community. Reforming the
machinery of the United Nations is no substitute for the willingness of Governments to use the
Organization, nor can it, by itself, bridge the very real differences in interests and power tha
exist among Member States. What it can achieve is to maximize the institutional effectiveness
of the United Nations, thereby enabling it to do better what it is asked to do and, consequently,
to advocate and undertake with credibility its larger mission as an agency of progressive change
for the world’s nations and peoples alike.

7.     This effort requires a frank assessment of the United Nations major institutional strengths
and weaknesses, coupled with a clear understanding of the institutional context in which the
United Nations will operate in the years ahead.

Institutional strengths and weaknesses

8.      The greatest source of strength enjoyed by the United Nations stems from its universality
of membership and the comprehensive scope of its mandate. And the most encompassing
manifestation of this strength is in the normative realm. Norms that approach universality form
a principled basis on which to assess and guide practice within the community of nations. Such
norms have not only a moral import; they also provide the institutional underpinnings of daily
life within the international community: expectations as to rights and obligations, the mutual
predictability of behaviour offered by the rule of law, the specification of best practices, a nearly
endless array of standards, without which the conduct of routine international transactions would
be inconceivable.

9.      Its universal character and comprehensive mandate make the United Nations a unique and
indispensable forum for Governments to identify emerging global issues, to negotiate and
validate common approaches to them, and to mobilize energies and resources for implementing
agreed actions. The convening power of the United Nations has produced impressive results in a
great variety of fields, including trade and development, environment, human rights, the


                                                                                                   /...
                                                -11-




progressive development and codification of international law, gender equality and population, as
well as in peace and security and disarmament.

10.    Moreover, in some key areas, such as development cooperation, the United Nations
normative capacity is linked directly to assisting national policy and is further supported by its
own operational activities. Only the United Nations has expertise across virtually the entire
range of development concerns, including their social, economic and political dimensions. And
only the United Nations has the potential to provide support across the spectrum from
humanitarian relief or peacekeeping to development activities.

11.     At the same time, the United Nations operational capacities and programme ambitions
cannot possibly fully match the enormous breadth of its deliberative agenda. In some areas,
operational mandates have outstripped the Organization’s resources provided by its Member
States, leaving an unbridgeable gap between needs and expectations, on the one hand, and
delivery, on the other. And in other instances the United Nations is simply not well suited to
carry out operations.

12.     The major source of institutional weakness in the United Nations is the fact that over the
course of the past half century certain of its organizational features have tended to become
fragmented, duplicative and rigid, in some areas ineffective, in others superfluous. The cold war
and its concomitant system of bloc politics made it extremely difficult and in some cases
impossible for the Organization to implement the Charter conceptions of its many roles,
especially in the area of peace and security. Indeed, they affected the functioning of the entirety
of the United Nations, from programme priorities to organizational modalities and personnel
management.

13.     Although the United Nations was able, despite this inhospitable setting, to launch
numerous new initiatives throughout the cold war years, all too often they were simply layered
onto previous activities rather than being effectively integrated in them, or replacing outrigh
tasks that had become outdated. Even previous efforts to reform the functioning of the United
Nations were constrained by these same forces. More often than not, they produced parallel
mechanisms or created additional bodies that were intended to coordinate, rather than instituting
effective management structures.

14.     Once the cold war ended, the United Nations rushed, and was pushed, to respond to a
vast increase in demand for its services. The Organization began to aid transitions to
democracy, national reconciliation and market reforms. It was called upon to provide
unprecedented levels of humanitarian assistance. The United Nations peacekeeping mechanism
for a time became the international community’s emergency services, fire brigade, gendarmerie
and military deterrent, even in instances where there was no peace to be kept. Mistakes were
made along the way -- in many cases because the means given to the Organization did not match
the demands made upon it.

                                                                                                 /...
                                               -12-




15.     Now that the frenzy of the immediate post-cold war years has passed, the United Nations
can, and must, step back to reassess which are the most effective means to realize its enduring
goals. The fundamental challenge is to fashion a leadership and management structure that will
result in a better focused, more coherent, more responsive and more cost-effective United
Nations.

The institutional contex

16.     The geopolitical landscape within which the United Nations functions continues to
undergo major shifts. Over the course of the next generation, a majority of the world’s mos
rapidly growing economies will be located in what is now the developing world, accelerating a
trajectory that has been building steadily. At the same time, many of the least developed
countries, particularly those of sub-Saharan Africa, risk being bypassed by this process of
economic expansion and transformation and require increased levels and diverse forms of
external assistance. The United Nations must be fully prepared to respond to the diverse needs
and challenges arising from these patterns of change.

17.     Another long-term change that affects the functioning of the United Nations is the degree
to which policy issues have become, or are now better understood to be, intersectoral or
trans-sectoral in character. Development was one of the first major areas of policy concern to
challenge this traditional pattern systematically, followed by the environment. For the United
Nations, the challenge has become pervasive: sustainable development, post-conflic
peace-building, emergency relief operations, the link between humanitarian assistance and
development cooperation -- these and many other new United Nations policy concerns cut across
both sectoral and institutional boundaries.

18.     The implications of this change for the United Nations are clear: future success hinges
on its ability to achieve a unity of purpose among its diverse departments, funds and
programmes, enabling it to act coherently and deploy its resources strategically. In addition,
alliances and partnerships with the specialized agencies and other organizations must become
part of normal organizational routine.

19.     In addition, the pace of change has been accelerating. Scientific advances move from the
laboratory into factories and farms, homes and hospitals, more rapidly than ever before.
Growing pools of investment capital and increased capital mobility are redrawing the maps of
economic geography at historically unprecedented rates. Successive waves of innovations in
information technology quickly render state-of-the-art products and techniques obsolete. Round-
the-clock news coverage and the Internet are creating real-time global sensibilities. And as a
result of the knowledge revolution generally, policy makers and concerned publics know more
about the possible ways in which today’s actions or inactions might shape the state of things to
come, in some measure eroding the distinction between present and future for policy purposes.


                                                                                                  /...
                                                -13-




This radically transformed temporal context of policy-making puts a premium on agility and
flexibility of any organization that operates within it. The United Nations is no exception.

20.     Finally, the institutional context in which all international organizations now operate is so
much more densely populated by other international actors, both public and private, than it was
in the past. In the case of the United Nations, when the first General Assembly’s 51 Members
convened at Lake Success in 1946, the Bretton Woods institutions were barely functioning. The
General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade did not yet exist. Few regional organizations were in
place. Most Governments maintained currency exchange controls and trade restrictions,
minimizing the flow of international economic transactions. With such notable exceptions as the
International Committee of the Red Cross, international non-governmental organizations typically
were umbrella associations of national professional societies.

21.     Today, United Nations Members number 185, and intergovernmental organizations at all
levels number in the thousands. The resources of several of these organizations far exceed those
of the United Nations. Moreover, the expanding transnational network of non-governmental
organizations encompasses virtually every sector of public concern, from the environment and
human rights to the provision of micro-credit and is active at virtually every level of social
organization, from villages all the way to global summits. And the private sector continues to
expand transnationally. International financial flows tower over world trade by a ratio of 60:1,
while trade itself continues to outpace annual increases in world gross domestic product by
approximately 5 per cent. Private foreign investment to developing countries, which has been
rapidly increasing, now exceeds steadily declining official transfers to those countries by some
$200 billion per annum.

22.      The implications of these developments for the United Nations are twofold. First, future
success demands that the United Nations focus, within its overall Charter mission, on those
activities, or on those aspects of activities, that it does better than others. Second, success
requires that the United Nations devise effective means by which to collaborate with other
international organizations and institutions of civil society, thereby amplifying the impact of its
own moral, institutional and material resources.

23.    In sum, the very organizational features that are now most demanded by the United
Nations external context in some respects are in shortest supply: strategic deployment of
resources, unity of purpose, coherence of effort, agility and flexibility. The current reform effor
aims at redressing this imbalance and setting the United Nations on a course of revitalization for
the twenty-first century.




                                                                                                  /...
                                                -14-




A programme of reform

24.     The institutional reforms outlined in the present report consist of three types of measures.
The first are those that the Secretary-General can and will undertake on his own initiative,
largely concerning the organization and management of the Secretariat programmes and funds.
The second are complementary measures that reside within the jurisdiction of Member States,
including the structure and functioning of intergovernmental bodies, which require their approval.
Finally, several more fundamental proposals are advanced for serious consideration and
deliberation and possible action in the longer term.

25.     Reform is not an event; it is a process. And the process will not end with the presen
report. The proposals contained herein, therefore, are important not only for the specific ways in
which they will produce a stronger, more resilient and more flexible United Nations now, bu
also for the general direction their implementation will impart to the future evolution of the
Organization. The coming century promises to be a time of yet deeper and more rapid global
change. The United Nations must be ready.


                                  II. INITIATING CHANGE

26.     Efforts at institutional reform have been under way in virtually all component parts of the
Organization, ranging from Secretariat departments to intergovernmental working groups. The
proposals advanced in the present report draw on those efforts. But the vantage point here is
different: the present initiatives concern the structure and functioning of the Organization as a
whole -- in particular its ability to act as a whole. What is more, as they pertain to the United
Nations Secretariat, the present initiatives take as their starting point not the existing
organizational chart but the core institutional problems that need to be redressed, both generically
and in each of the substantive domains in which the Organization operates.


                       A. A new leadership and management structure

27.      As the chief administrative officer of the Organization, the Secretary-General must ensure
that the policies and directives of Member States are translated into action in an efficient and
effective manner. He is expected to furnish ideas and guidance on the major issues that confron
the international community. Ultimately, as the Preparatory Commission for the United Nations
noted more than 50 years ago: “The Secretary-General, more than anyone else, will stand for
the United Nations as a whole. In the eyes of the world, he must embody the principles and
ideals of the United Nations Charter to which the Organization seeks to give effect.” The
Secretary-General has sought to meet these several challenges in conducting the current effort a
institutional reform.


                                                                                                 /...
                                                -15-




28.     In January 1997, the Secretary-General took the first steps by reorganizing the
Secretariat’s work programme around the five areas that comprise the core missions of the
United Nations: peace and security; economic and social affairs; development cooperation;
humanitarian affairs; and human rights. This process involved all United Nations departments,
programmes and funds. Subsequently, Executive Committees were established in the first four
areas, while human rights was designated as cutting across, and therefore participating in, each
of the other four. All United Nations entities were assigned to one or more core group.

29.    The aim in establishing these Executive Committees was to sharpen the contribution tha
each unit makes to the overall objectives of the Organization by reducing duplication of effor
and facilitating greater complementarity and coherence. The Executive Committees were
designed, therefore, as instruments of policy development, decision-making and management.
The heads of United Nations entities consult with one another on work programmes as well as
other substantive and administrative matters of collective concern, to identify and exploit ways of
pooling resources and services so as to maximize programme impact and minimize
administrative costs and more generally to facilitate joint strategic planning and decision-making.

30.     The work of the Executive Committees has already yielded practical results. For
example, the Executive Committee for Development Cooperation has moved to create country-
specific frameworks of collaborative policy planning, which will serve as a common starting
point for programme activities, at the country level, of all United Nations development funds,
programmes and eventually, it is hoped, the specialized agencies.

31.     In March 1997, the Secretary-General announced a further set of administrative and
budgetary measures. Three departments in the economic and social area are being integrated
into one, so as to rationalize the United Nations multifaceted efforts in these fields. At the same
time, three Secretariat entities serving intergovernmental forums were combined into one, better
to support the work of the Organization’s legislative bodies and conferences. In addition, a
series of efficiency projects have been undertaken by managers throughout the Secretariat. They
now number around 550, of which 265 were completed by June 1997. The objective of these
projects is to enhance cost-effectiveness in programme delivery.

32.    As a result of these and other economies, the Secretary-General’s proposed programme
budget for the 1998-1999 biennium realizes a negative rate of growth. It also includes a
decrease in the number of Secretariat posts by 1,000 -- down 25 per cent from a high of more
than 12,000 in 1984-1985. Both are illustrated below.




                                                                                                   /...
                                                 -16-




These targets were realized not by sacrificing mandates, but by achieving them more cost-
effectively. Moreover, the programme of reforms described in this report further facilitates and
supports these outcomes.

33.    The significant progress and positive changes in institutional culture that these initiatives
have generated make it possible now to consolidate as well as build upon them. The Secretary-
General, therefore, will institute a series of further actions to refashion the organization of the
Secretariat while making complementary recommendations to Member States.

Strengthening leadership capacity in the Secretaria

34.     The first challenge is to enhance the capacity of the Secretary-General and senior
managers to achieve greater unity of purpose, coherence of effort, agility and responsiveness
throughout the United Nations, including its funds and programmes. The following measures are
designed to transform the organization of the Secretariat from its traditional depiction of a
disparate collection of units with little strategic focus, to a more coherent, horizontal, more
strategic and agile structure. This new management structure is portrayed in the figure entitled
“A framework for change”, which is reproduced at the end of Part One below.




                                                                                                   /...
                                                -17-




       Senior Management Group

35.     The Secretary-General is establishing a Senior Management Group. Its membership will
include the convenors of the four executive committees, plus several additional senior managers
selected by the Secretary-General. Chaired by the Secretary-General, its primary responsibility
will be to assist the Secretary-General in leading the process of change and instituting sound
management throughout the Organization.

36.     The executive committees will continue to operate with some changes in membership and
functions to reflect the results of the present report. One of their new responsibilities will be to
render operational and implement the many recommendations detailed in Part Two of the presen
report. The Secretary-General will continue to hold regular meetings with all heads of
departments, programmes and funds.

       Deputy Secretary-General

37.     The multiplicity of roles performed by the Secretary-General is a major source of strength
of the office. But it also limits the attention which any Secretary-General can devote to
providing sustained intellectual and organizational leadership. Similarly, the very breadth of the
United Nations substantive programmes is a great source of its potential institutional strength,
and is especially important when the needs of the international community or individual Member
States cut across distinct sectors of activity, as in complex emergencies or in transitions from
peacekeeping to post-conflict peace-building and on to longer-term development concerns. Bu
the Organization is not always able to take advantage of these strengths.

38.     Accordingly, the Secretary-General will recommend to the General Assembly that the
post of Deputy Secretary-General be established. The Deputy Secretary-General will undertake
responsibilities at the request of the Secretary-General. He or she will perform a particular role
in ensuring the success of activities and programmes that cross functional sectors and Secretaria
units, so that the full weight of the office of Secretary-General can be brought to bear on
achieving intersectoral and inter-institutional coherence.

       Strategic Planning Uni

39.    The ability of the Secretary-General to lead the Organization effectively in a time of
rapid and complex changes also hinges on his having access to and being able to make use of
the best available policy-relevant information and research. Accordingly, a small strategic
planning unit will be set up to support the Secretary-General in this respect. It will be charged
with identifying emerging global issues and trends, analysing their implications for the roles and
working methods of the United Nations, and devising policy recommendations for the Secretary-
General and the Senior Management Group.


                                                                                                 /...
                                                -18-




Enhancing strategic direction from the General Assembly

40.    The General Assembly is the organ of the United Nations that most fully embodies the
universal and democratic character of the Organization. It sets the overall policy framework
within which the United Nations operates. As the world enters the new century, with its novel
challenges and complex issues, the relationship between the General Assembly and the
Secretary-General must be close and complementary, based on shared understandings and
common goals. It would be highly advantageous, therefore, if the effort to enhance conceptual
and institutional coherence within the Secretariat was paralleled at the intergovernmental level.
This could be accomplished through several means.

       Focusing legislative debates

41.     It may be desirable to incorporate the principal features of United Nations conferences
into the programmes of the General Assembly and the Economic and Social Council. This could
be accomplished by having the Assembly decide, say two years in advance, on a major issue to
be the subject of a special high-level one-week segment. Preparations for the segment would be
the responsibility of the Economic and Social Council, or any other appropriate body, which in
turn could employ many of the techniques and modalities developed for the preparation of
United Nations conferences. If the Assembly agrees, it may wish to consider “International
Financing for Development” as the first issue.

42.     The General Assembly could profitably decide to arrange for each of its Main
Committees to focus its work thematically. These thematic discussions would represent a
collective effort to address in depth at each Assembly session a limited number of areas of major
current concern.

       Streamlined agenda

43.     The work of the Secretariat derives directly from the mandates it receives from the
General Assembly and other legislative bodies. It is the responsibility of the Secretary-General
to implement all of these mandates. Member States could increase the effectiveness of the
Organization and enable the Secretary-General to concentrate Secretariat resources in the areas of
highest priority by undertaking an in-depth review of the agenda of the General Assembly. Over
the years, many items have remained on the agenda despite their having decreased in importance
or the situations they were designed to address having changed. A review might identify items
of lesser priority that can be removed and establish a process to ensure that the agenda evolves
to reflect areas of principal priority in the future. Doing so might also enable the General
Assembly to conclude its deliberations expeditiously.




                                                                                                /...
                                               -19-




       Sunset provisions

44.      In addition, the Secretary-General recommends to the General Assembly that each
initiative that involves new organizational structures and/or major commitments of funds be
subjected to specific time limits, by which it would be reviewed and renewed only by explici
action of the Assembly.

       Results-based budgeting

45.     Few institutional mechanisms have a greater impact on the strategic functioning and
direction of any organization than its budgetary process. Member States appropriately desire
maximum transparency in the use of resources. At the same time, programme managers
frequently have to cope with very detailed and sometimes inflexible specification of inputs,
including levels and types of personnel, determined by the General Assembly in its attempt to
exercise greater policy guidance. In the process, the real issues of how best to achieve the
mandated results receive relatively little attention.

46.     The Secretary-General, therefore, proposes that Member States and he enter into a
dialogue with the aim of shifting the United Nations programme budget from a system of inpu
accounting to results-based accountability. Under this new approach, which many Member
States have adopted at the national level, the General Assembly, through its relevan
Committees, would specify the results they expect the Organization to achieve within the
relevant budgetary constraints. The Secretariat would be held responsible for, and judged by, the
extent to which the specified results are reached. At the same time, the Secretary-General would
exercise greater responsibility for determining the precise mix of inputs by which to achieve
these results most effectively.

       Restoring the Charter-based division of functions

47.     The Charter and its preparatory documentation express clearly the intention that there
should be a well-defined division of functions between the General Assembly and the Secretary-
General. Encroachment by either on the authority of the other undermines the efficient and
effective operation of the Organization. Over the years, the General Assembly has adopted
resolutions and established practices, including in relation to high-level appointments, that have
constrained the Secretary-General’s ability to administer the Secretariat. Yet at other times the
Assembly has provided insufficient guidance as to programme objectives and implementation.

48.    The Secretary-General proposes that the General Assembly review the current distribution
of functions and responsibilities between the two, with a view to restoring the balance that was
envisioned when the Organization was established. He would welcome the opportunity to offer
suggestions to the General Assembly in this regard.


                                                                                                /...
                                               -20-




Acting as one at the country level

49.     The United Nations performs its operational work at the country level, collaborating with
Governments and non-governmental organizations in such diverse endeavours as promoting
development, caring for refugees, immunizing children and delivering humanitarian assistance.
All too often, the separate United Nations entities involved in these activities pursue their
activities separately, without regard to or benefiting from one another’s presence. The greater
unity of purpose and coherence in performance that these strategic management initiatives will
accomplish at headquarters level must also be reflected in the field.

       Programme coherence and complementarities

50.     In parallel to the United Nations Development Group, described below, which is being
established at United Nations Headquarters, the Secretary-General has asked the participating
funds and programmes to establish corresponding consultative and collaborative arrangements a
the country level. Moreover, the country-level assistance provided by each United Nations
programme and fund will be integrated into a United Nations Development Assistance
Framework.

       UN House

51.    All United Nations entities with ongoing missions at the country level will operate in
common premises -- “UN House” and operate under a single United Nations flag. In countries
where there is a Resident Coordinator, all funds and programmes as well as United Nations
information centres will become part of a single United Nations office under the Residen
Coordinator.

Increasing administrative effectiveness and efficiencies

52.    In an era of growing demands and constrained resources, the management systems of the
United Nations must be strengthened. More effective management is necessary for better
support to the accomplishment of mandates established by Member States. A managemen
reform programme is under way and will be accelerated to reduce administrative and other
overhead costs.

       The human resources dimension

53.     Current human resources management policies and practices require significan
improvements if they are to do justice to the mission of the Organization. Building on the
Secretary-General’s human resources management strategy, endorsed by the General Assembly,
further efforts are needed to optimize the talents and dedication of the vast majority of United
Nations staff members. As requested by the General Assembly, the Secretary-General will

                                                                                               /...
                                               -21-




present to the General Assembly at its fifty-third session a comprehensive review of progress to
date in implementing his strategy, together with new proposals. The Secretary-General will
submit a Code of Conduct to the Assembly at its fifty-second session, designed to ensure that all
United Nations staff meet the highest standards of independence and integrity.

54.     Numerous other initiatives are also being undertaken: investment in staff training,
including managerial staff, to improve substantive and other skills; retraining staff affected by
the reform measures; and a simplification of rules, streamlined recruitment and administrative
practices, and more effective career development. Decentralization and delegation of authority,
coupled with full accountability, are keys to success. Finally, the Secretary-General is
determined to realize fully the Organization’s goals of geographical representation and gender
balance.

       Enhancing delivery of mandates

55.     Every department and office in the Secretariat is carrying out management reviews to
enhance their ability to accomplish objectives in the most cost-effective manner possible while
strengthening services to Member States. Information technology and procurement are being
streamlined and common service facilities are being established in New York, Geneva, Vienna
and Nairobi.

       Electronic United Nations

56.    The United Nations is providing the possibility of electronic access to United Nations
documents, publications and other information for all permanent missions, non-governmental
organizations and the public in all countries. All permanent missions in New York are
connected to the United Nations Web Site and the optical disk system via the Internet as of
30 June 1997.

Creating a dividend for developmen

57.     Reform is not intrinsically an exercise in cutting costs or reducing staff. Its aim is to
ensure that the resources entrusted to the Organization by its Members are used to achieve the
mandates they give it in the most effective and efficient manner, including at the country level.
The Secretary-General is committed to reducing non-programme costs from 38 per cent of the
regular budget to 25 per cent over the next two bienniums, and turning the savings into a
“dividend for development”.




                                                                                                  /...
                                                -22-




       Development accoun

58.     The Secretary-General
proposes that the General Assembly
agree to establish a developmen
account, funded by savings from
reduced non-programme costs and
other management efficiencies. He
envisages that the account could
grow to at least $200 million for the
biennium beginning 1 January 2002,
and that any unspent funds from the
1996-1997 regular budget be utilized
as a “down payment” in order to
establish the account.


Reaching out to civil society

59.     Civil society constitutes a major and increasingly important force in international life. In
recent years, the United Nations has found that much of its work, particularly at the country
level, involves intimately the diverse and dedicated contributions of non-governmental
organizations and groups -- be it in economic and social development, humanitarian affairs,
public health or the promotion of human rights. Similarly, the pronounced growth in the flow of
private international economic transactions over the past decade has established the private sector
as the major driving force of international economic change. Yet despite those growing
manifestations of an ever-more robust global civil society, the United Nations is at presen
inadequately equipped to engage civil society and make it a true partner in its work.

60.     Accordingly, the Secretary-General is making arrangements for all United Nations entities
to be open to and work closely with civil society organizations that are active in their respective
sectors, and to facilitate increased consultation and cooperation between the United Nations and
such organizations.

Instilling a culture of communications

61.     As part of his March initiatives, the Secretary-General appointed a task force on the
reorientation of United Nations public information activities. The task force has submitted a
comprehensive report, which includes several conclusions and recommendations that are quite
fundamental. It urges, above all, that the communications functions be placed at the heart of the
strategic management of the Organization. The success of the United Nations, the repor
concludes, is intimately related to its ability to communicate its message effectively, and a new

                                                                                                 /...
                                                 -23-




culture of communications must, therefore, pervade the entire Organization. The Secretary-
General supports the central tenets of the report, and is developing an implementation plan.


                                        B. Core activities

62.     The aim of the new leadership and management structure described above is to provide
the Organization’s leaders the tools by which to effect greater unity of purpose, coherence of
efforts and responsiveness agility on the part of the United Nations. That same aim also mus
shape the Organization’s substantive work programmes. Senior managers throughout the
Organization increasingly must learn to act on the basis of common substantive objectives, no
the budgetary lines or institutional boundaries that may separate them. The detailed actions and
recommendations contained in part two of the present report describe the Secretary-General’s
proposals in that regard, together with their rationales. The major challenges and proposals are
highlighted below.

Peace and security

63.     The dramatic developments of the post-cold-war era challenged the United Nations role in
fostering and maintaining international peace and security. Peacekeeping will remain an
indispensable instrument of the United Nations, and efforts to strengthen its effectiveness are
under way. The institutional capacity for preventive diplomacy and post-conflict peace-building
similarly is being bolstered.

64.    In the area of peacekeeping, major improvements have been made in reaching precise
understandings with Member States on the personnel and matériel they will have available a
agreed states of readiness for peacekeeping operations. The Secretary-General now urges
Member States to agree on arrangements and provide the means that would enable the United
Nations to mount and deploy peacekeeping operations rapidly.

65.     In preventive diplomacy, the United Nations is maintaining a global watch to detec
potential threats to international peace and security, with the objective of supporting the efforts
of the Security Council. This early warning system is being continually upgraded, so that the
Security Council and other concerned organizations may receive timely advice on the basis of
which to carry out preventive action.

66.     The Secretary-General has designated the Department of Political Affairs as the United
Nations focal point for post-conflict peace-building -- that is, the mechanism for ensuring tha
United Nations efforts in countries that are emerging from crises are fully integrated and
faithfully reflect the mission objectives specified by the Security Council and the Secretary-
General. The Department of Political Affairs will carry out its functions in its capacity as
convenor of the Executive Committee for Peace and Security.

                                                                                                      /...
                                                -24-




67.     The proliferation of weapons -- weapons of mass destruction as well as conventional
weapons -- threatens international stability. The United Nations Centre for Disarmament Affairs
is being reconstituted as the Department for Disarmament and Arms Regulation. A high priority
for this Department will be to develop strategies and policies to prevent the proliferation of all
types of weapons and to control the flow of conventional weapons to areas of conflict.

Economic and social affairs

68.     The promotion of economic and social progress is one of the United Nations primary
objectives, enshrined in the Charter. The persistence of several long-standing problems remains
a serious challenge, including the alleviation of poverty and facilitating more active participation
by greater numbers of countries in the expanding global economy. New issues have also
emerged in recent decades, among them being the challenges of sustainable development, gender
equality, globalization in its various manifestations and the spreading transnational networks of
crime, terrorism and drug trafficking. A series of measures are proposed to improve the
functioning of the United Nations in these domains.

69.     The consolidation of three departments in the economic and social fields into the new
Department of Economic and Social Affairs is being effected and will lead to further
streamlining and efficiencies. In addition, the Secretary-General is proposing to Member States
ways to strengthen the Economic and Social Council. They include providing it with greater
access to expert support, particularly in the area of macroeconomic policy, and consolidating
several of its subsidiary bodies.

70.    Vienna will become the locus for integrated efforts by the United Nations to fight crime,
drugs and terrorism. A new high profile United Nations Office for Drug Control and Crime
Prevention will be constituted, consolidating and enhancing United Nations activities in these
areas.

71.    The Secretary-General is also exploring ways to strengthen and possibly restructure the
United Nations Environment Programme and the Centre for Human Settlements, the two United
Nations bodies that are most directly involved in environment, sustainable development and
human settlements issues.

Development cooperation

72.    In the realm of development cooperation, the distinctiveness and specific focus of each
United Nations fund and programme involved in development activities provide exceedingly
important benefits to the countries and people they serve, and thereby contribute significantly to
the overall mission of the United Nations. At the same time, to achieve maximum effectiveness,
development activities also require a more integrated collaborative approach than exists in the


                                                                                                  /...
                                                -25-




United Nations at present. The Secretary-General is proposing several major initiatives designed
to harmonize these twin concerns.

73.    A United Nations Development Group is being constituted, comprising the major United
Nations development programmes and funds as well as departments and other relevant entities.
The objectives of the Group are to facilitate joint policy formation and decision-making,
encourage programmatic cooperation and realize management efficiencies. This change a
headquarters will be reflected at the regional and country levels, where all United Nations
programmes will be integrated within a United Nations Development Assistance Framework.

74.      Participating funds and programmes in the Development Group will retain their curren
distinctiveness and existing structures of accountability. At the same time, the Secretary-General
invites Member States to explore corresponding ways of facilitating more integrated oversigh
by, for example, convening joint committees and/or consecutive meetings of their respective
executive boards.

75.    Finally, the Secretary-General has initiated consultations with the President of the World
Bank in order to strengthen cooperation and achieve greater rationalization and coordination
between the Bank and the United Nations.

Humanitarian affairs

76.    The humanitarian mission of the United Nations is to assist victims of natural disasters
and other emergencies. In recent years, humanitarian emergencies have often occurred in
complex political and military contexts, including civil strife, in which relief workers themselves
may be at risk. Experience has shown, and the General Assembly has recognized, tha
humanitarian actions today extend well beyond the provision of relief, and also entail early
warning, prevention, advocacy and rehabilitation as well as supporting transition to longer-term
development. It is also clear that improvements are necessary in the coordination and rapid
deployment of United Nations humanitarian responses.

77.     Accordingly, the Secretary-General is instituting a major restructuring of Secretaria
machinery responsible for coordinating humanitarian assistance. An office of the Emergency
Relief Coordinator will be established to replace the present Department of Humanitarian Affairs.
The Department’s operational responsibilities will be transferred to other appropriate entities tha
provide assistance on the ground. Its coordination and advocacy role will be bolstered and
performed by the Emergency Relief Coordinator. Moreover, a steering committee is being
established to intensify inter-agency coordination, coordination at the field level and resource
mobilization.




                                                                                                 /...
                                               -26-




Human rights

78.     Human rights are integral to the promotion of peace and security, economic prosperity
and social equity. For its entire life as a world organization, the United Nations has been
actively promoting and protecting human rights, devising instruments to monitor compliance with
international agreements, while at the same time remaining cognizant of national and cultural
diversities. Accordingly, the issue of human rights has been designated as cutting across each of
the four substantive fields of the Secretariat’s work programme (peace and security; economic
and social affairs; development cooperation; and humanitarian affairs).

79.     A major task for the United Nations, therefore, is to enhance its human rights programme
and fully integrate it into the broad range of the Organization’s activities. Several significan
changes have already been implemented. In addition, the Secretary-General is consolidating the
Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights and the Centre for Human Rights, into a
single Office of the High Commissioner. The new High Commissioner for Human Rights will,
therefore, have a solid institutional basis from which to lead the Organization’s mission in the
domain of human rights.


                                      C. The road ahead

80.     The changes called for in the preceding section would move the United Nations a long
way towards the objective stipulated at the outset of the present report: for the United Nations
to accomplish more by doing what it does better. Most of the measures to be undertaken by the
Secretary-General can and will be implemented immediately. The implementation of those
which require deliberation among and agreement by Member States perforce must take somewha
longer, but it should be possible for all to be instituted by the end of 1999.

81.     There are many more changes that are desirable, however. Some are of a fundamental
nature on which no political consensus may now exist, while others exceed the current authority
of the General Assembly and the Secretary-General as provided in the Charter and thus would
entail Charter revision. But if the United Nations is to be well positioned for the services tha
will be demanded of it in the twenty-first century, it is important that a process be put in place
that begins to address these broader issues now. Several such issues that follow from the reform
measures proposed in the present report are identified below. They concern a number of the
principal organs of the United Nations, the relationship between the United Nations and its
agencies, the creation of a new judicial body that would strengthen significantly the rule of law
in the century ahead and relations with civil society.




                                                                                                /...
                                               -27-




       Financing the United Nations

82.    The United Nations precarious financial situation is directly linked to the failure of some
Member States to discharge their treaty obligations regarding prompt and full payment of
assessed financial contributions. The current reform effort cannot achieve optimal results unless
the Organization’s finances are put in order. The Secretary-General appeals to Member States to
resolve the financial crisis speedily and with good will.

83.     Member States must hold one another accountable for meeting their financial obligations.
However, as an interim measure, pending a lasting solution of the Organization’s financial
situation, the Secretary-General proposes that a revolving credit fund be established by Member
States, initially capitalized at the level of up to $1 billion, through voluntary contributions or
other means that Member States may wish to suggest.

       A new concept of trusteeship

84.     Although the United Nations was established primarily to serve Member States, it also
expresses the highest aspirations of men, women and children around the world. Indeed, the
Charter begins by declaring the determination of “We the peoples of the United Nations” to
achieve a peaceful and just world order. Relations between the United Nations and agencies of
civil society are growing in salience in every major sector of the United Nations agenda. The
global commons are the policy domain in which this intermingling of sectors and institutions is
most advanced.

85.     Member States appear to have decided to retain the Trusteeship Council. The Secretary-
General proposes, therefore, that it be reconstituted as the forum through which Member States
exercise their collective trusteeship for the integrity of the global environment and common areas
such as the oceans, atmosphere and outer space. At the same time, it should serve to link the
United Nations and civil society in addressing these areas of global concern, which require the
active contribution of public, private and voluntary sectors.

       The United Nations system

86.     The Charter provides that the United Nations should draw in its work on a decentralized
system of specialized agencies. Each of these agencies was established by a separate treaty
among Governments and each is directly accountable to its own governing bodies. The United
Nations authority over their policies and activities is limited, under the Charter, to making
“recommendations” for their “coordination”. The measures proposed by this reform effort focus
on the Organization itself, that is, on the United Nations Secretariat, programmes and funds. Bu
if the objectives of the United Nations are to be fully realized, a much greater degree of
concerted will and coordinated action is required throughout the system as a whole.


                                                                                                /...
                                               -28-




87.     The Secretary-General intends to work closely with the executive heads of the
organizations of the entire system, through the Administrative Committee on Coordination,
which the Secretary-General chairs, to strengthen that Committee’s capacity to adapt the United
Nations system as a whole to the new challenges it faces. Doing so will serve to rationalize the
division of labour within existing structures of the United Nations system.

88.     There are, at the same time, gaps in the existing structures that merit the attention of
Governments. At present, no organization has principal responsibility for dealing
comprehensively with the energy sector, for example, or with technology, or in respect of the
major transition taking place in many countries from State to private enterprises. These gaps
could be included in the mandate of a restructured and revitalized United Nations Industrial
Development Organization (UNIDO), the future of which is uncertain despite the fact that it has
recently effected some impressive reforms and cost reductions. The Secretary-General believes
that the question of UNIDO’s future should be reviewed in this broader context, and is prepared
to use his good offices in that respect.

89.     Beyond that, there is a need to examine how the weaknesses of the decentralized system
can best be corrected while preserving its advantages. Accordingly, the Secretary-General is
proposing that Member States consider establishing a Special Commission, at the ministerial
level, to examine possible needs for changes in the Charter of the United Nations and in the
treaties from which the specialized agencies derive their mandates, so as to effect major
improvements in the capacity of the United Nations system, as a system, to serve the world
community better in the twenty-first century.

       International Criminal Cour

90.    For nearly half a century -- almost as long as the United Nations has been in existence --
the General Assembly has recognized the need to establish an international criminal court to
prosecute and punish persons responsible for crimes such as genocide, crimes against humanity
and war crimes. Recent horrific human tragedies have made it more imperative than ever to do
so. In June 1998 a diplomatic conference will be convened to finalize and adopt a treaty tha
would establish such a court. The Secretary-General strongly supports this effort.

       Millennium Assembly

91.     The advent of the new century and the millennium provides a timely opportunity for the
United Nations to review progress and give future direction to the issues and proposals raised in
this section. The General Assembly in the year 2000 could be convened as a special
“Millennium Assembly” with a summit segment at which heads of Government could come
together to articulate their vision of prospects and challenges for the new millennium and agree
on a process for fundamental review of the role of the United Nations. Consideration could also


                                                                                               /...
                                               -29-




be given to encouraging representatives of civil society to hold a “People’s Millennium
Assembly” as a separate, companion event.


               III. A NEW UNITED NATIONS FOR THE NEW CENTURY

92.      The history of the twentieth century demonstrates decisively the utility of
multilateralism. In the inter-war period, the nations of the world tried to organize the conduct of
international relations on the basis of exclusionary trade and monetary blocs in economic affairs,
and competitive bilateral alliances in the security realm. As a result, the fabric of international
society, and of the League of Nations that served it, was so weak and so frayed that it could no
restrain the atavistic forces pushing the world first towards economic warfare and then towards
military conflagration. The generation of leaders that reconstructed the international order after
the Second World War had this lesson uppermost in their minds. The United Nations was and
still is a monument to their vision.

93.     That same history also shows that orders of international relations based solely on the
projection of power, uninformed and unrestrained by a shared sense of universal principles,
rights and legitimacy, establish no lasting roots. They endure no longer than the asymmetries in
material capabilities that gave rise to and sustained them. The framers of the United Nations
firmly grasped this lesson as well, even as their political realism led them to reconcile
universalistic principles with special roles and responsibilities of those most capable of
contributing to their realization.

94.     Lastly, twentieth century history shows the impressive adaptive capacity of international
relations based on multilateral principles and norms. The last half century especially has
witnessed successive waves of tumultuous changes, including the end of colonial empires, the
outbreak and termination of the cold war, the emergence of new economic powers at an
unprecedented pace, the immense expansion of the policy agenda with which nations are obliged
to cope. In the past, fundamental change in the system of States was frequently associated with
system-wide conflict. The post-Second World War edifice of multilateral organization has
helped to stabilize geopolitical and economic transformations, at the global and regional levels
alike, much as the generation that founded these organizations hoped they would.

95.     Everything that is now known about the next quarter century or so -- be it demographic
trends, shifts in global production structures, continued financial integration, relative rates of
economic growth, predictable dislocations in the biosphere -- suggests that equally if not more
far-reaching changes lie ahead. The international community, therefore, has an obligation to
itself and to successor generations to put in place effective multilateral mechanisms that can
successfully harness the mutual benefits such changes may offer while managing their adverse
consequences. With the reforms proposed in the present report, the United Nations will be better
equipped to play its part in meeting this challenge.

                                                                                                /...
-30-




       /...
                                                               -31-




                                                GLOSSARY OF ACRONYMS

                                                        Peace and security

                   DPA     Department of Political Affairs
                 DPKO      Department of Peacekeeping Operations
                 DDAR      Department for Disarmament and Arms Regulation

                                             United Nations Development Group

                 UNDP      United Nations Development Programme
               UNICEF      United Nations Children’s Fund
               UNFPA       United Nations Population Fund

                                                       Humanitarian affairs

                   ERC     Emergency Relief Coordinator
               UNHCR       United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
                  WFP      World Food Programme
              UNRWA        United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near Eas

                                                       Economic and social

                 DESA      Department of Economic and Social Affairs
              Regional     Economic Commission for Europe, Economic and Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific,
           commissions     Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean, Economic Commission for Africa,
                           Economic and Social Commission for Western Asia
             UNCTAD        United Nations Conference on Trade and Developmen
                 UNEP      United Nations Environment Programme
                Habitat    United Nations Centre for Human Settlements
               ODCCP       Office of Drug Control and Crime Prevention
                  UNU      United Nations University

                                                         General services

                  OLA      Office of Legal Affairs
                   DM      Department of Managemen
               GAACS       Department of General Assembly Affairs and Conference Services
                   DPI     Department of Public Information
                  OIOS     Office of Internal Oversight Services


Explanatory note for char

This chart places the various United Nations entities under the sector to which they principally contribute. A number of entities
contribute to the work of more than one. Human rights (comprising the Office of the High Commissioner and the Centre for
Human Rights) is introduced in the chart as a distinct sector but it also constitutes an integral dimension of all sectors.


                                                                                                                              /...
                                               -32-




                       PART TWO: MEASURES AND PROPOSALS


96.    The new leadership and management structure described in Part One entails several
important changes in the leadership capacity of the Secretariat. The main actions and
recommendations are as follows.

       Action 1. A Senior Management Group will be established in the Secretariat,
       comprising the convenors of the four Executive Committees, together with several
       additional senior officials selected by the Secretary-General. Its primary
       responsibility will be to assist the Secretary-General in leading the process of change
       and instituting sound management throughout the Organization.

       Action 2. A Strategic Planning Unit will be set up in the Office of the Secretary-
       General to identify emerging global issues and trends, analyse their implications for
       the Organization and devise policy recommendations for the Secretary-General and
       the Senior Management Group.


 Recommendation:

 That the General Assembly establish the post of Deputy Secretary-General, with
 responsibilities as outlined in paragraphs 37 and 38 above. This recommendation will be the
 subject of a separate submission by the Secretary-General to the General Assembly.


                 IV.   NEW APPROACHES TO POLICY FORMULATION

97. The General Assembly is the organ of the United Nations which most fully embodies the
universal and democratic character of the world Organization. It sets the overall policy
framework within which the United Nations system as a whole operates. As part of its broad
responsibilities and powers under Chapter IV of the Charter, the Assembly has specific oversigh
authority regarding budgetary and administrative matters. As the only intergovernmental body
with a broad mandate to discuss “any matters within the scope of the present Charter” (Art. X),
the Assembly stands at the apex of the United Nations system and has a crucial role to play in
providing leadership and broad policy guidance as the Organization and the United Nations
system prepare to meet the changing needs of the world community in the next century. Recen
years have witnessed repeated calls for the revitalization of the Assembly to allow it to play the
role envisaged for it in the Charter more effectively. As part of the reorganization of the
Secretariat, the Secretary-General has consolidated the servicing of the General Assembly and
other legislative bodies in a new Department of General Assembly Affairs and Conference
Services. In convening the Open-Ended High-Level Working Group on the Strengthening of the


                                                                                                /...
                                               -33-




United Nations System, the Assembly recognized the need to take steps to reinforce its work and
that of the Secretariat. The deliberations of the Working Group have focused on a wide range of
issues critical to any reform effort.

98. It is largely at its special conferences that the United Nations attracts widespread attention
and media coverage, and these are usually concentrated within a period of two weeks. Such
conferences have proven to be extremely valuable to the United Nations and the world
community, particularly in focusing a high degree of public and political attention on importan
issues and providing the basis for agreement on measures to deal with them. In the light of this
experience, it may be desirable to incorporate the principal features of United Nations
conferences into the working methods of the General Assembly. This could be accomplished by
having the Assembly decide, two years in advance, on an issue or theme to be the subject of a
high-level one-week segment. Preparations for that segment would be the responsibility of the
Economic and Social Council, in areas under its purview, or of other appropriate
intergovernmental bodies, which in turn could employ many of the techniques and modalities
developed for the preparation of United Nations conferences. The adoption of such an approach
could improve both the public interest in and political effectiveness of the Assembly, as well as
the Economic and Social Council, and could reduce, though certainly not replace, the need for
some United Nations conferences.

99. It is further proposed that a thematic approach be adopted for the work of the Main
Committees. At present, some Main Committees have arrangements to focus or pay attention to
an area or subject at each General Assembly session. These arrangements are no
comprehensive, however, and indeed are essentially ad hoc. If each Main Committee would
decide in the previous year on a thematic focus for consideration the following year, it would
allow the Assembly, on an annual basis, to have a group of themes that would represent a
concerted effort on the part of the international community to make progress in designated areas
of current concern.

100. The large and varied scope of the agenda of the Assembly, which consists of 168 items
during the current session, presents a challenge to Member States and to the Secretariat in terms
of appreciating the range and scope of the issues under consideration. The agenda of the
Assembly constitutes, in effect, an overall annual work programme of the Organization, which
involves both the intergovernmental machinery and the Secretariat. Considered from this
perspective, there would be value in the Assembly identifying an accepted and authoritative




                                                                                                /...
                                                      -34-




instrumentality around which it could conceptualize and organize its agenda. That instrumen
exists in the priority areas of the medium-term plan for the period 1998-2001.1

101. The outcome of the Assembly’s discussions on most of the items on its agenda is
currently reflected in resolutions in an established format, which comprises several preambular
and operative provisions. The negotiation of these texts can be very time consuming. It is
suggested that the adoption of formal resolutions be reserved for outcomes that involve policy
recommendations addressed to Member States and the international community. Requests for
reports by the Secretary-General or other procedural outcomes could be reflected in simple
decisions to be drafted by Committee Chairmen for adoption by the Assembly. This would
make it possible for negotiations to be concentrated on the most important policy issues, and
serve to highlight the impact of the Assembly’s work on policy development. The adoption of a
thematic approach to the work of the Main Committees of General Assembly, and the time saved
by negotiating resolutions on a smaller number of items, should make it possible to reduce the
length of the annual sessions of the Assembly by at least three weeks.




   1
        (a) Maintenance of international peace and security;
        (b) Promotion of sustained economic growth and sustainable development in accordance with the relevan
resolutions of the General Assembly and recent United Nations conferences;
        (c) Development of Africa;
        (d) Promotion of human rights;
        (e) Effective coordination of humanitarian assistance efforts;
        (f) Promotion of justice and international law;
        (g) Disarmament;
        (h) Drug control, crime prevention, as well as combating international terrorism in all its forms and
manifestations.

                                                                                                                 /...
                                              -35-




 Recommendations:

 That the General Assembly:

 (a)  Decide, two years in advance, on an issue to be the subject of a special high-level,
 one-week segment;

 (b)   Decide to incorporate the principal features of United Nations conferences into the
 working methods of the General Assembly;

 (c)     Decide to arrange for each of its Main Committees to have an annual thematic focus
 for its work, which would represent a collective effort to address in each Assembly session a
 number of areas of current concern;

 (d)  Decide to conceptualize and organize its agenda around the eight priority areas of the
 medium-term plan of the Organization;

 (e)   Decide that normally policy recommendations to Member States and the international
 community would be in the form of resolutions while procedural or work programme
 conclusions would be in the form of concise decisions;

 (f)   Decide that the main part of its annual sessions, beginning on the third Tuesday in
 September, would not extend beyond November.

102. Reform of the Security Council is of great importance for its functioning and legitimacy.
Within the General Assembly, there have been intensive and prolonged discussions regarding the
expansion of the Council, an issue that can be resolved only by Member States. This is a key
issue for the United Nations and a positive resolution of it would contribute to the prospect of
moving forward with other issues.

103. The enhanced prominence of the Council has also resulted in intense scrutiny of its
procedures and working methods. Steps have been taken to regularize exchanges of information
and dialogue with non-Council members, including regular consultations with the troop
contributors and other concerned States. These changes, however, have not completely
addressed all of the concerns of non-Council members and efforts should continue to enhance
transparency and broaden support for Security Council decisions.




                                                                                                 /...
                                               -36-




                     V.   FOCUSING ON SUBSTANTIVE PRIORITIES

                             A. Peace, security and disarmamen

104. The end of the cold war transformed the international context of United Nations missions
and activities. In the area of peace and security, the Organization now finds itself primarily
concerned with intra-State conflicts, often with serious international implications and, in many
cases, complex humanitarian emergencies. Recent trends suggest that these types of conflicts
will continue to require priority attention by the United Nations.

105. The Security Council, after decades of stalemate, is now at the centre of international
efforts to maintain international peace and security. There is widespread agreement on some of
the concepts to guide action by the United Nations in the peace and security field: recognition
of the role of the Secretary-General in preventive action; the need for comprehensive approaches
in which the political, human rights, military, humanitarian and developmental assets of the
Organization are deployed to promote peace and human security; and a coherent engagement and
partnership with regional organizations and other external actors.

106. The complexity of the peacekeeping mandates of the Security Council and the lack of
sufficient resources and political will to implement them has undermined United Nations efforts
in a number of conflicts. It is, however, clear that peacekeeping will remain an indispensable
instrument of the United Nations and it is thus crucial to maintain the Organization’s capacity to
plan, manage and conduct these operations efficiently and successfully.

107. The United Nations does not have, at this point in its history, the institutional capacity to
conduct military enforcement measures under Chapter VII. Under present conditions, ad hoc
coalitions of willing Member States offer the most effective deterrent to aggression or to the
escalation or spread of an ongoing conflict. As in the past, a mandate from the Security Council
authorizing such a course of action is essential if the enforcement operation is to have broad
international support and legitimacy.

108. In recent years, the Security Council has called, with increasing frequency, for economic
sanctions as an enforcement tool under Chapter VII. The universal character of the United
Nations makes it a particularly appropriate body to consider and oversee such measures.
Consideration needs to be given, however, to making these sanctions more effective in achieving
the goal of modifying the behaviour of those targeted, while limiting the collateral damages.
There is also a need to address the broader humanitarian and economic effects of sanctions, as
well as objective criteria in their application and for their termination.

109. At the present time, the vision of the Charter of a workable system of collective security
has yet to be fully realized. The Organization still lacks the capacity to implement rapidly and
effectively decisions of the Security Council calling for the dispatch of peacekeeping operations

                                                                                                /...
                                               -37-




in crisis situations. Troops for peacekeeping missions are in some cases not made available by
Member States or made available under conditions that constrain an effective response.
Peacemaking and human rights operations, as well as peacekeeping operations, also lack a secure
financial footing, which has a serious impact on the viability of such operations.

Preventive action

110. The prevalence of intra-State warfare and multifaceted crises in the present period has
added new urgency to the need for a better understanding of their root causes. It is recognized
that greater emphasis should be placed on timely and adequate preventive action. The United
Nations of the twenty-first century must become increasingly a focus of preventive measures.

111. The Organization is already maintaining a global watch to detect potential threats to
international peace and security with the objective of supporting the efforts of the Security
Council and the Secretary-General to deter conflict. Improving this capacity will require close
contact with the Security Council and stronger cooperation with Governments, especially those
with relevant capabilities, as well as with regional or subregional organizations,
non-governmental organizations and academic and other institutions.

Peacekeeping

112. A critical lesson from past experience is the need to be able to deploy operations quickly
so as to establish a credible presence at an early stage and prevent a further intensification of
armed conflict. Consultations are currently under way with Member States to explore the
optimal means of funding the nucleus of a rapidly deployable mission headquarters -- a small,
multidisciplinary group which would be the first in the field to set an operation in motion.

113. Preparedness on the part of the Organization must be coupled with the ready availability
of trained and equipped troops. A number of States, within the context of the United Nations
standby arrangements, are developing units that could deploy immediately upon a decision of the
Security Council. Most encouraging is the decision of a group of Member States to participate
in the establishment of a standby high-readiness brigade. The availability of troops continues to
depend on whether their respective Governments are prepared to commit them on a case-by-case
basis. An effective system of global security can be said to exist only if the Council can
dispatch military forces rapidly and with the requisite predictability and reliability.

114. Serious financial constraints have often affected the establishment and proper functioning
of peacekeeping operations. The peacekeeping accounts have furthermore had to be used to
cover shortfalls in the United Nations regular budget. The result is a delay in payments to troop-
contributing countries. This is an intolerable situation that cannot be allowed to continue. If the
Organization is to continue its work for international peace and security, and do it well, it needs


                                                                                                  /...
                                               -38-




the continuity provided by a sufficient base of resources from the regular budget, mission
budgets and the support account for peacekeeping operations.

115. Considerable difficulties are also at times encountered in negotiating and properly
implementing a status-of-forces agreement. Amendments proposed by certain host Governments
sometimes constitute fundamental departures from the customary practices and principles
applicable to United Nations peacekeeping operations, and negotiating on such a basis delays the
conclusion of an acceptable agreement. A time-frame prescribed by the Security Council for the
conclusion of the status-of-forces agreement and an inclusion in the resolution establishing the
operation of a provision to the effect that the model status-of-forces agreement (see A/45/594)
shall apply provisionally, pending the conclusion of such an agreement, would contribute to
expediting its conclusion.


 Recommendations:

 That Governments possessing the relevant capabilities establish the practice of providing
 information to the Secretary-General that would strengthen his efforts in preventive action.

 That the Security Council and the General Assembly consider measures to enhance the rapid
 reaction capacity of the United Nations.

 That the Security Council, in establishing a peacekeeping operation, prescribe a time-frame for
 the conclusion of the status-of-forces agreement between the United Nations and the hos
 Government for the operation in question and, pending the conclusion of such an agreement,
 the model status-of-forces agreement would apply provisionally.

Cooperation with regional organizations

116. Different regional organizations have been involved in preventive action, peacekeeping and
other peace-related activities carried out under a Security Council mandate. Based on
Chapter VIII of the Charter, the Organization has developed a number of complementary efforts
with regional organizations and arrangements in carrying out these activities. These have
included codeployment of field operations, such as in Georgia and Liberia and the designation of
a joint United Nations-Organization of African Unity Special Representative for the Great Lakes.
Cooperation with regional organizations will be intensified and regional organizations will
increasingly become partners of the United Nations in all activities related to the maintenance of
international peace and security, including conflict-prevention.




                                                                                                /...
                                                -39-




Secretariat reforms

117. It is now widely accepted that present-day conflicts have many dimensions that must be
addressed comprehensively and require more integrated and coordinated action. Wide-ranging
reforms have already been put in place, and cooperation between the Department of Political
Affairs, the Department of Peacekeeping Operations, the Department of Humanitarian Affairs
and other relevant departments and entities called upon to mount and participate in field
operations has been considerably expanded. Lines of authority and reporting from field missions
have been clarified and information-sharing and coordination between the Departments and with
other entities of the system, particularly on humanitarian matters, has been enhanced. The
Executive Committees on Peace and Security and Humanitarian Affairs will examine ways to
strengthen cooperation among the Departments concerned, in particular with regard to
information-gathering and analysis and to gain the maximum possible benefit from lessons
learned in the conduct of field missions.

118. Within the Department of Peacekeeping Operations, civilian-military integration is being
tightened and reinforced. While much has already been accomplished in this regard, further
progress will be difficult as long as a number of units, in the absence of budgeted posts, are
staffed almost entirely by gratis military officers. The existing capacity of the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations must be consolidated by ensuring civilian-military cooperation in all
areas from the planning and preparation of an operation through its implementation, closure and
post-mission analysis. This can be achieved only with a budget that reflects the Department’s
real personnel requirements.

119. An integrated approach is particularly important in the field, where lack of cohesion or
differences among the United Nations entities can be exploited by the parties. It is for this
reason that the role of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General is so vital. In
countries where large multidisciplinary field operations are in place, the Special Representative
will ensure that the efforts of the different components of the system are mutually reinforcing.
In such circumstances, the Special Representative has authority over the force commanders,
civilian police commissioners, resident coordinators and humanitarian coordinators.

      Action 3: A plan will be developed to phase out the use of gratis personnel in the
      Secretariat at the earliest possible date.

      Action 4: In the field, the Special Representative of the Secretary-General will have
      authority over all United Nations entities.




                                                                                                    /...
                                               -40-




Post-conflict peace-building

120. In recent years, post-conflict peace-building has assumed new prominence in the work of
the United Nations. The concept of post-conflict peace-building refers to the various concurren
and integrated actions undertaken at the end of a conflict to consolidate peace and prevent a
recurrence of armed confrontation. Peace-building may involve the creation or strengthening of
national institutions; the monitoring of elections; the promotion of human rights; the provision of
reintegration and rehabilitation programmes; and the creation of conditions for resumed
development. Peace-building does not replace ongoing humanitarian and development activities
in countries emerging from crises. Rather it aims to build on them and introduce further
activities or reorientation of existing ones which, in addition to their intrinsic humanitarian or
development value, are politically relevant because they reduce the risk of a resumption of
conflict and contribute to creating conditions most conducive to reconciliation, reconstruction and
recovery. The multidimensional nature of such an enterprise demands effective coordination
measures.

121. As focal point and convenor of the Executive Committee on Peace and Security, the
Department of Political Affairs will work particularly closely with the Office of the High
Commissioner for Human Rights, the Department of Peacekeeping Operations, the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR), the United Nations Developmen
Programme (UNDP) and the World Bank, bearing in mind in particular the importance of
determining the point at which the emphasis on a peace-building role will give way to full-
fledged reconstruction and development activities. Task forces will continue to be established to
ensure integrated action by the entire United Nations system, the chairmanship being decided on
each occasion on a pragmatic basis. The focal point will support and reinforce the work of these
task forces.

      Action 5: With immediate effect, the Department of Political Affairs, in its capacity
      as current convenor of the Executive Committee on Peace and Security, will be the
      focal point within the United Nations for post-conflict peace-building. The Executive
      Committee on Peace and Security, in collaboration with other executive committees
      as appropriate, will be responsible for the design and implementation of post-conflic
      peace-building initiatives, including the definition of objectives, criteria and
      operational guidelines for post-conflict peace-building by the organizations of the
      United Nations system.

Disarmament and regulation of armaments

122. Disarmament is a central issue on the global agenda. With the end of the superpower
rivalry, nations everywhere have come to recognize their stake in the success of multilateral
negotiations and the monitoring of weapons developments. As a consequence, the United
Nations has taken centre stage in the worldwide effort to limit both weapons and conflict.

                                                                                                /...
                                               -41-




Within the framework of the Conference on Disarmament and the General Assembly, significan
advances have been made in the establishment and consolidation of multilateral legal instruments
and nuclear-weapon-free zones. A valuable role has also been played by the Disarmamen
Commission.

123. The momentum towards nuclear disarmament has increased significantly with the signing
of the Comprehensive Nuclear Test Ban Treaty and its endorsement by the General Assembly;
the indefinite extension of the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty; the establishment of the African
Nuclear-Weapon-Free Zone; efforts to bring fully in force the Treaty of Bangkok, which
establishes a Nuclear-Weapon-Free Zone in South East Asia; and the strengthening of
Non-Proliferation Treaty safeguards by the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA). Other
positive developments have been the entry into force of the Chemical Weapons Convention and
the strengthening of the prohibition against biological weapons. Recent progress in the effort to
reduce and eliminate landmines is also of crucial importance to the United Nations.

124. The emergence of new dangers and actors has added new urgency to the tasks that the
United Nations is called upon to play in the area of disarmament. In the post-cold-war period,
there is a growing threat from the spread of nuclear weapons technology and material, as well as
a wider interest in acquiring biological and chemical weapons and means of delivery for such
weapons. Regional warlords, criminal syndicates and various terrorist groups have, during recen
years, become involved in trading in and the acquisition of weapons of mass destruction. The
extensive use and destructive power of landmines in areas of armed conflict and the flow of
conventional weapons and small arms into the hands of civilians have become items on the
international agenda and have often to be addressed in the context of peacekeeping operations.

125. A managerial reorganization of Secretariat capacities will now be effected so that a
structure will be in place to respond effectively to the priorities of Member States in the
disarmament area. A new Department for Disarmament and Arms Regulation will be
established, replacing the Centre for Disarmament Affairs. It will be based in New York to
ensure effective interaction with the General Assembly, the Security Council, the Office of the
Secretary-General and relevant United Nations departments. Since the Conference on
Disarmament meets in Geneva for three to four months every year, it will require continuing
support. Therefore, existing staff capacity to support the Conference on Disarmament, the
monitoring of multilateral disarmament treaties and conventions, fellowship and training
programmes and the United Nations Institute for Disarmament Research (UNIDIR) will continue
to be maintained in Geneva. The Director-General of the United Nations Office at Geneva will
continue to act as the Secretary-General of the Conference on Disarmament reporting directly to
the Secretary-General.

      Action 6: A Department for Disarmament and Arms Regulation, headed by an
      under-secretary-general, will be established.


                                                                                               /...
                                                -42-




126. Taking into account new developments and trends indicated above, Member States may
consider it appropriate to review the current multilateral negotiating or deliberative structures and
their agendas with a view to updating and rationalizing them.


 Recommendation:

 That the General Assembly undertake a review of the work of the Disarmament Commission
 and the First Committee with a view to updating, rationalizing and streamlining their work.


                                 B. Economic and social affairs

127. International economic and social cooperation and the promotion of conditions of
economic and social progress and development were considered by the founders of the United
Nations as being among the prime purposes of the Organization. Finding ways to advance this
fundamental goal under changing conditions remains a high priority and should be a principal
objective of the United Nations reform process. The Organization must strengthen the capacity
to address long-standing obstacles to development and, at the same time, equip itself to mee
new and emerging challenges.

128. The strengths and potential of the United Nations in this area are considerable. It is the
only institution that has the breadth of mandate to address the root causes of instability and
conflict and to pursue in a comprehensive and integrated manner the wide array of economic,
social and environmental issues impinging on development. The Organization is also best placed
to build bridges of cooperation and the necessary partnership for development among
Governments, the private sector, civil society and regional and global organizations. Many of
the issue areas affecting development have been comprehensively addressed in the international
conferences organized by the United Nations in the 1990s. The cross-cutting and common
themes emerging from these conferences require common policy approaches and treatment, and a
common effort at ensuring sustained follow-up. Taken together, they represent a framework for
an integrated, systemic approach to socio-economic development in its widest sense.

129. The contribution of the United Nations is particularly important at a time of shifting
paradigms in socio-economic development philosophy and thinking. As a global centre for
innovative thinking and consensus-building, the United Nations should make maximum use of its
analytical capacities to identify common problems and recommend solutions. Through its
normative activities, the Organization can help to bring about an external environment tha
allows all countries and their enterprises to compete in international markets on an equal footing;
and, through its advisory and operational activities, it can help to develop the tools and human
resource capabilities that address the supply-side constraints faced by many countries. The
United Nations must continue to endeavour to affect economic decisions taken in other forums


                                                                                                  /...
                                               -43-




from the perspective of the developing countries and remains best placed to build consensus
based on the perspective of interdependence between issues, and to identify the means by which
sustained and sustainable development can be realized by all countries.

The role of the Economic and Social Council

130. The Economic and Social Council needs to be positioned to play more effectively the role
envisaged for it in the Charter. In the longer term, a fundamental rethinking of the role of the
Council may be required, given the experience of the past 50 years and new economic and social
realities, including providing it with greater authority through Charter revision. An immediate
priority is to enhance the essential policy management and coordinating roles of the Economic
and Social Council and to equip it to fulfil better its role in the macroeconomic policy
coordination dialogue. The Council also needs to organize its sessions and reporting procedures
better and to rationalize its subsidiary machinery, including the governing bodies of United
Nations funds and programmes.

Organization and methods of work of the Economic and Social Council

131. In recent years, the Council has begun to organize itself in more effective ways so as to
enhance its contribution to the international policy coordination dialogue. The “one-day” policy
dialogue established by the Council brings together the executive heads of the World Bank, the
International Monetary Fund (IMF), the World Trade Organization (WTO) and the United
Nations Conference on Trade and Development (UNCTAD) in a unique dialogue with the
membership of the Organization. The policy dialogue, together with the debate that takes place
at the high-level segment with the participation of a growing number of ministers and senior
officials from capitals, demonstrates that Member States want the Council to play a distinct role
in the macroeconomic policy coordination dialogue. In order to strengthen that role further, the
Council could be reliably assisted by panels of experts supported by an identifiable, dedicated
secretariat that would facilitate consideration of timely and relevant issues. Convening
specialized panels on particular subjects would allow the Council to secure the advice of leading
experts. At the same time, it is proposed that the Committee for Development Planning could,
consequently, be discontinued.

132. The informal dialogue with heads of United Nations funds and programmes that takes
place at the high-level meeting of the Council’s “operational activities for developmen
segment”, has also been proving increasingly useful. The Council, through this segment, is also
called upon to give coherent policy guidance on a system-wide basis to operational activities for
development. This requires improved preparations, so that key policy issues arising from the
reports of the executive boards of the funds and programmes are effectively identified, and a
level of participation in the Council that can give the necessary political weight to the policy
prescriptions emanating from it. The active participation of the least developed countries, which


                                                                                               /...
                                                 -44-




are the beneficiaries of operational activities, is especially important in order to render the
dialogue more meaningful.

133. The general segment of the Council where the reports of its subsidiary bodies are
reviewed should also be more focused. The reports of the subsidiary bodies are now taken up
sequentially without sufficient attention to the linkages between them. Furthermore, the
consideration by the Council of the reports of the subsidiary bodies is largely procedural, rather
than policy-oriented. There is also a clear need to enhance the Council’s capacity to manage ex
ante rather than ex post the work programme of its functional commissions.

134. A recommendation that the Council institute a segment on humanitarian affairs is
contained in paragraph 197 of the present report. Recommendations on the strengthening of
substantive secretariat support for the Council are dealt with, together with other secretaria
reforms, in paragraphs 138 to 142 below.


 Recommendations:

 That the Economic and Social Council consider holding its various segments at different,
 pre-established periods during the year, without affecting the total duration of the meetings
 held by the Council in any given year. This should facilitate attendance at these segments by
 the ministers directly concerned with the themes and policy issues considered at each of these
 segments. The duration of the operational activities segment should be extended to enable the
 Council to provide effective policy guidance to the work of the different programmes and
 funds.

 That the Committee for Development Planning be replaced by panels of experts on various
 policy issues set up by the Economic and Social Council on an ad hoc basis, whose members
 would be appointed on the recommendation of the Secretary-General.

 That the work of the operational activities for development segment be enhanced by extending
 the length of the segment and establishing a trust fund to facilitate the participation of
 officials from the least developed countries in the segment.

Reform of the subsidiary bodies

135. In order to assist the Economic and Social Council in its review of its subsidiary
machinery, in accordance with General Assembly resolution 50/227, and guided by the spirit and
intent of the resolution, proposals for a wide-ranging consolidation and reconfiguration of the
subsidiary machinery that seek to exploit complementarities and provide opportunities for cross-
fertilization have been developed for consideration by Member States. The main purpose of
presenting these proposals is to provide a technical input and contribution to the deliberations


                                                                                                  /...
                                                           -45-




that are currently under way. Details of the recommendations and the rationale for them are
contained in a background note to be made available to the General Assembly.


 Recommendations:

 (a)    That the work and functions of the Committee on New and Renewable Sources of
 Energy and Energy for Development and the Committee on Natural Resources be consolidated
 into the Commission on Sustainable Development;

 (b)   That the Commission on Science and Technology for Development become a subsidiary
 body of the UNCTAD Trade and Development Board with the UNCTAD secretaria
 continuing to provide substantive servicing of the Commission;

 (c)    That the functions of the Commission on Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice and
 the Commission on Narcotic Drugs be consolidated into a single Commission under
 arrangements that will fully preserve the treaty-based functions entrusted to the latter. The
 International Narcotics Control Board would report to the new Commission;2

 (d)   That the Intergovernmental Group of Experts on International Standards of Accounting
 and Reporting be maintained as an expert body reporting through the UNCTAD Commission
 on Investment, Technology and Related Financial Issues;

 (e)   That the work of the Ad Hoc Group of Experts in International Tax Matters be
 reviewed after the completion of its present mandate;

 (f)   That the Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights report to the Economic
 and Social Council through the Commission on Human Rights.

Regional commissions and the reform process

136. Numerous studies have been undertaken with regard to the role of the regional
commissions. While an increasing number of regional and subregional integration groupings are
being established, the regional commissions remain the bodies that are par excellence politically
neutral and democratic and where each country of the region has an equal voice. The regional
commissions have nonetheless been acutely aware of the need to redefine their role in response
to changing circumstances and the emergence of these integration groupings. In certain cases,
major changes in membership have taken place, partially owing to developments in Central and
Eastern Europe. The commissions also need to consider their role in the context of global



   2
       See also in this connection paras. 143-145 below.

                                                                                                 /...
                                                       -46-




organizations. Recently, reform efforts have been intensified by the commissions which, to
varying degrees, have streamlined both their intergovernmental and their secretariat structures.3

137. The reform efforts of the regional commissions have not involved an overall review of
their role within a reformed United Nations. In consequence, there are a number of general
issues, spanning the work of the commissions, which the Economic and Social Council should
address.


 Recommendation:

 That the Economic and Social Council initiate a general review of the regional commissions,
 in consultation with other regional bodies and Governments, bearing in mind the individual
 reviews each commission has already conducted, in order to consider the core competencies
 of the regional commissions vis-à-vis global bodies and other regional and subregional
 intergovernmental bodies; and evaluate the most appropriate division of labour with regard to
 both standard-setting and technical cooperation activities and prospects for further
 rationalization and consolidation.

Reform of the Secretaria

138. At the Secretariat level, a series of measures are under way in order to ensure the mos
rational use of the resources available to the Organization in this area. Emphasis is being placed
on identifying areas of strength in which recognized competencies have been developed in
various parts of the Secretariat; reducing fragmentation of skills and duplication of efforts;
creating the necessary synergies and critical mass in each sector in order to raise the quality of
analyses and operations; and streamlining and rationalizing delivery capacities.

139. The decision in March of this year to consolidate Secretariat departments in the economic
and social field into a new Department of Economic and Social Affairs was intended to further
these objectives. The establishment of the new Department followed an extensive reorganization
of UNCTAD, involving both the UNCTAD secretariat and its intergovernmental machinery. The
participation of UNCTAD and UNEP, along with the new Department of Economic and Social
Affairs, in the Executive Committee on Economic and Social Affairs, is now making it possible
for the Organization to address in a coherent way two key dimensions of development: the
environmental and the trade/investment/technology nexus. In addition, the participation of the
regional commissions in the Executive Committee ensures that global and regional aspects of
development are harmonized and brought to bear, in a complementary way, on the work of the
Organization, including substantive support provided to the Economic and Social Council. The


    3
     For a more detailed review of reform measures undertaken, see the report of the Secretary-General on regional
cooperation in the economic, social and related fields (E/1997/40).

                                                                                                                /...
                                                 -47-




Executive Committee is actively pursuing modalities to pool more effectively the Organization’s
resources and capacities in key areas, such as the preparation of economic and social surveys,
and to achieve a more efficient division of labour within the Secretariat.

140. The capacity of the Secretariat to support the Council effectively needs to be enhanced
through the establishment in the new department of an identifiable substantive secretariat, which
would work in close cooperation and collaboration with the relevant departments, funds and
programmes and organizations and agencies within the United Nations system. Such a
secretariat would provide the main substantive support to the Council, particularly with regard to
the high-level, coordination and operational activities segments. It would also prepare the annual
report of the Council to the General Assembly as well as analytical, consolidated reports
identifying cross-cutting policy issues arising out of the general segment and in support of the
policy role of the operational activities segment. As part of that secretariat, an identifiable inter-
agency affairs unit will be created, reinforced by staff seconded by programmes and agencies, to
service the Administrative Committee on Coordination and promote continuous exchange of
information and consultations throughout the United Nations system.

141. In giving effect to the decision to establish the Department of Economic and Social
Affairs, adjustments are being introduced to improve the division of labour with other entities in
the economic and social fields, taking into account also the proposed reforms in the
intergovernmental process and structures. Particular attention is being given to reinforcing areas
of work related to South-South cooperation and support to Africa and the least developed
countries and small island developing States. It is intended that these areas would be given
priority attention as a result of resources released from efficiency measures. Details will be
provided in the revised budget estimates.

142. In order to enhance policy analysis within the United Nations, centres of excellence and
critical mass need to be developed exploiting relative strengths and capacities available in the
different economic and social entities within the Organization. The new Department has clear
core competencies in areas such as an integrated approach to development; sustainable
development; social development; advancement, rights and empowerment of women; and
demographic and statistical work, as well as issues arising from the integrated follow-up to
recent United Nations conferences. UNCTAD has core competencies in macroeconomic policy
analysis in the context of interdependence and in support of the interrelated issues of trade and
development.

      Action 7:

      (a) A substantive Economic and Social Council secretariat headed at a senior level
          will be established in the new consolidated Department of Economic and Social
          Affairs. Details will be contained in the revised budget estimates.


                                                                                                   /...
                                                -48-




      (b) The Department of Economic and Social Affairs and UNCTAD will undertake a
          review of their activities in the macroeconomic area in order to strengthen their
          cooperation and rationalize and enhance United Nations work in this area. This
          review will include options to reorient, reinforce and better focus the capacities
          of the United Nations to ensure its leadership in meeting priority information
          needs of the world community. Recommendations will be presented to the
          Secretary-General by 1 October 1997.

Drug control, crime prevention and combatting international terrorism

143. Government authority and civil society are increasingly threatened by transnational
networks of crime, narcotics, money-laundering and terrorism. Access by underworld groups to
sophisticated information technologies and weaponry as well as to the various instrumentalities
through which the global market economy functions are vastly increasing the potential power
and influence of these groups, posing a threat to law and order and to legitimate economic and
political institutions. To both industrialized and developing countries, this is an issue of growing
concern in which international cooperation is essential.

144. Drug control, crime prevention and combating international terrorism in all its forms and
manifestations is one of the eight priority areas in the medium-term plan for the period 1998-
2001. So far, the programmes are carried out by two separate entities, namely, the United
Nations International Drug Control Programme (UNDCP) and the Crime Prevention and
Criminal Justice Division, both located in Vienna. UNDCP services the Commission on
Narcotic Drugs as well as the International Narcotics Board, while the Crime Prevention and
Criminal Justice Division services the Commission on Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice.
As the issues of drugs and crime clearly intersect, an organizational realignment of the two
programmes would strengthen the United Nations capacity to respond to these critically
important problems.

145. In order to enable the Organization to focus and enhance its capacity to address the
interrelated issues of drug control and transnational crime, the Division for Crime Prevention and
Criminal Justice will be strengthened and transformed into a Centre for International Crime
Prevention. Capacities within the Centre to deal with international terrorism and increasingly
serious phenomena such as money-laundering and trafficking in women and children will be
enhanced. The balance in the work of UNDCP between combating drug trafficking and other
components of drug control, including activities aimed at prevention and rehabilitation and the
reduction of illicit supply through alternative development, will not be affected. At the same
time, synergies between the work programme of the Centre and that of UNDCP will be
enhanced, including through joint programmes on matters of common concern such as money-
laundering. A common managerial structure would be established under an Executive Director
managing UNDCP as well as the new Centre, who will also serve as Director-General of the
United Nations Office at Vienna.

                                                                                                 /...
                                                -49-




      Action 8: Vienna will become the locus for United Nations efforts against crime,
      drugs and terrorism. The Division for Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice will
      be reconstituted as the Centre for International Crime Prevention and proposals
      submitted to Member States to strengthen its capacities. The new Centre and the
      United Nations International Drug Control Programme will together form a new
      Office for Drug Control and Crime Prevention.


                                  C. Development cooperation

146. The nature of development has changed dramatically and is now characterized by greater
political and economic openness as well as sensitivity to social and environmental concerns.
Import substitution and barriers to trade are being replaced by export-orientation and the
elimination of trade distortions. This has resulted in a dramatic increase in private sector capital
flows, which have now become the primary engine for development in many countries tha
possess the requisite institutional base. The majority of developing countries, however, continue
to have very limited access to private capital and depend on a diminishing pool of official
development assistance (ODA) while struggling with problems of poverty, low levels of social
development, environmental degradation and, in some cases, political instability. It is estimated
that, in 1996, foreign direct investment in Asia amounted to US$ 48 billion, but jus
US$ 2.6 billion in sub-Saharan Africa.

147. The demands on the United Nations have expanded over time and are reflected in the
mandates emanating from global conferences. Economic, environmental, social and political
changes have added further priorities for development assistance, particularly in managing the
effects of economic and political transition, ensuring sustainable livelihoods, reversing trends
such as the feminization of poverty and redressing threats to the environment. Despite these
growing needs, the key funds and programmes of the United Nations continue to face stagnation
and lack of predictability and reliability in core contributions, accompanied by a significan
growth in earmarked resources. Individually, the funds and programmes represent a very modes
proportion of total resource flows for development purposes. The United Nations must therefore
seek to reassess and refocus its role in development operations in relation to significant new
entrants in the development assistance arena and important shifts in the policies and role played
by others. In the context of development operations, in particular, the United Nations mus
develop closer cooperation with the World Bank, the International Monetary Fund and the
regional development banks.

The importance of coherence and effectiveness in development operations

148. The diversity, distinctiveness and specialized focus of the United Nations funds and
programmes involved in development operations provide important benefits to the United
Nations and to developing countries. The reform process is designed to maintain and reinforce

                                                                                                  /...
                                                     -50-




the distinctive nature of these entities while seeking to facilitate their functioning in a more
unified, cooperative and coherent framework as members of the United Nations family.

149. With the increasing realization that effective development requires a more holistic
approach, there has been a tendency for each sectoral organization to broaden its activities to
areas that overlap with others. This is a phenomenon witnessed in the case of all organizations
of the system. Overlap of this type has increased the need for cooperation and coordination
among the organizations concerned and compounded the problems created by the fragmentation
of existing structures. At the country level, this fragmentation and overlap make it difficult for
the United Nations to respond to the needs of countries in a consistent, coherent and cost-
effective manner.

150. Fragmentation and overlap compound the problem of the decreasing relative size of
United Nations operational activities resources in companion with other financial flows.
Together, the expenditures of UNDP, the United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF) and the
United Nations Population Fund (UNFPA) in 1994-1995 amounted to just US$ 4,706 million,
covering 135 programme countries.4 Despite the grant nature of this assistance, it remains a
relatively limited amount. The way in which these resources are deployed, leveraged and
managed is therefore critical to their effectiveness and impact.

151. The General Assembly, beginning at its forty-fourth session, had adopted a series of
resolutions that have sought to address these issues.5 While stressing that the mandates of funds
and programmes should be respected and enhanced, it emphasized that the “separate funds and
programmes and specialized agencies must make a commitment to work together to integrate
assistance provided by the United Nations system into the development process of the recipien
countries in a fully coordinated manner”. It has “stressed that coordination in funding
arrangements and procedures should maximize complementarities and avoid duplication so as to
increase the positive impact of development cooperation activities on the development of
developing countries”. The General Assembly has also emphasized that “the United Nations
system at the country level should be structured and composed in such a way that it corresponds
to ongoing and projected cooperation programmes rather than to the institutional structure of the
United Nations system”.

152. The work done by the Executive Committee on Development Operations constitutes
important progress in the implementation of the changes announced on 17 March of this year.
UNDP continues as the manager and funder of the Resident Coordinator system. The Residen


   4
     See the report of the Administrative Committee on Coordination to the Economic and Social Council on
programme resources of the United Nations system for the biennium 1994-1995 (E/1995/64).
   5
     General Assembly resolutions 44/211 of 28 December 1989, 47/199 of 22 December 1992 and 50/120 of
20 December 1995.

                                                                                                            /...
                                                 -51-




Coordinator system will be strengthened by the selection of Resident Coordinators from all
organizations concerned. The Executive Committee on Development Operations has agreed on a
series of measures designed to advance this process, while identifying some areas on which
further consultations are required.

153. On the basis of this experience, it is now feasible to move into the next phase of this
process with the designation of the United Nations Development Group to supersede the sectoral
group on development operations. The Development Group Executive Committee will be
reconstituted under the leadership of the convenor of the Executive Committee, the Administrator
of UNDP. Its membership will consist of UNDP, UNICEF and UNFPA with participation by
others in respect of matters relevant to their interests and mandates. The Development Group
Executive Committee will further sharpen the contributions that each entity is called upon to
make to the overall objectives of the Organization, while helping each entity to avoid duplication
and build on the work and capacities of others; serve as a policy development and managemen
instrument geared to contributing to, and effecting, policy, administrative and operational
decisions in each entity, while at the same time strengthening decision-making processes in the
Organization as a whole; provide a forum for heads of entities to consult on submissions to their
governing bodies on both substantive and administrative matters that have implications for other
members of the Group or for the Organization as a whole; contribute to strengthening policy
coherence and cost-effectiveness by avoiding duplication and by pooling resources and services
so as to maximize programme impact and minimize administrative costs; share draft work
programme and budget documents sufficiently in advance of their finalization and submission to
the relevant governing bodies to make such consultations a meaningful phase in the
programming process; and promote a more unified United Nations presence at the country level
through, inter alia, providing a forum for concerted directives to Resident Coordinators and field
representatives in order to ensure more integrated and consistent substantive support from
headquarters for their work.

154. In providing for improved modalities of cooperation, the establishment of the United
Nations Development Group will in no way dilute or compromise the distinctive character or
identity of participating organizations or the accountability of their heads vis-à-vis the Secretary-
General or their respective governing bodies. On the contrary, it would serve to strengthen their
individual and collective capacities to respond more effectively to policy directives and
requirements. This arrangement also preserves the individual resource mobilization capability
and responsibilities of the individual funds and programmes, while enabling a greater proportion
of their funds to be utilized directly in substantive programmes. It should, at the same time,
serve to strengthen support for the essential intergovernmental organs -- the General Assembly
and the Economic and Social Council -- by helping these organs to focus the exercise of their
governance responsibilities better and by introducing a more effective collective mechanism for
preparing and following up their overall policy directives.




                                                                                                   /...
                                               -52-




155. Building on the significant progress already made, the United Nations Development Group
will continue to pursue harmonized or common programme and budget frameworks, services,
facilities, administration and personnel practices.

156. The International Fund for Agricultural Development (IFAD) is the one major operational
fund of the United Nations system that would not be covered by the United Nations
Development Group. Despite its status as a specialized agency, there would be considerable
benefit to the closest possible association between IFAD and the main funding institutions of the
United Nations that have an operational presence at the country level.

157. The World Food Programme (WFP), while operating primarily in the humanitarian field,
continues to have significant field operations related to development, particularly in the areas of
transport, food for work and school feeding. WFP will therefore be invited to be associated with
the United Nations Development Group and to participate in its Executive Committee in areas
relevant to its operations and interests.

      Action 9:

      (a) The United Nations Development Group will supersede the current sectoral
          group on development operations and will be led by a reconstituted Executive
          Committee chaired by the current convenor of the Executive Committee on
          Development Operations, the Administrator of UNDP. The membership of the
          Development Group Executive Committee will consist of the heads of UNDP,
          UNICEF and UNFPA, with provision for the participation of other organizations
          in areas relevant to their interests.

      (b) The Executive Committee of the United Nations Development Group will be
          asked to develop counterpart arrangements at the country level.

The country level

158. The main focus of development operations will continue to be at the country level, where
programmes are deployed in support of national priorities. Focusing programmes on national
priorities in line with General Assembly resolutions will ensure relevance, preserve national
ownership and foster the successful development of national capacity.

159. The General Assembly has decided that, “in order to enhance coherence and programming
and resource utilization, programme development and component approval, capacity and
authority should be further decentralized to the field offices, which should be provided with the
necessary technical and substantive expertise”. It further urged, in this context, that governing
bodies of all funds, programmes and specialized agencies should ensure that the prescribed limits
on field-level authority for cancelling, modifying and adding activities within approved

                                                                                                /...
                                               -53-




programmes and for shifting resources within approved budget lines of individual components of
a programme and among components of a programme with the approval of national authorities
should be expanded to become equal and uniform to the maximum extent possible in the contex
of enhanced accountability.

160. While the establishment of a United Nations Development Assistance Framework through
the United Nations Development Group must necessarily include coordination and coherence in
respect of fund-raising, it must not weaken or undermine the authority and independence of
individual fund-raising activities of UNICEF, UNFPA, UNDP and other funds and programmes.
This requires that each be able to retain the capacity to solicit, deploy and be accountable to
donors for contributions designated for their programmes. The budget of each of these funds
and programmes will continue to be clearly identifiable. In addition, full accountability for
funds raised will remain vested in the individual entities. Furthermore, country representatives
will remain directly responsible to the executive heads concerned on all issues related to the
individual country programmes as well as policy matters and issues related to their mandates.

161. There have been encouraging indications that if the proposed improvements in
consolidation at the country level are effected, some developing funding agencies may be
prepared to utilize the United Nations Development Assistance Framework for deployment of
their assistance to the country.

      Action 10:

      (a) In order to achieve goal-oriented collaboration, programmatic coherence and
          mutual reinforcement, the United Nations programmes of assistance will be
          formulated and presented as part of a single United Nations Developmen
          Assistance Framework with common objectives and time-frame. Programme
          funds managed by each of the programmes and funds would be included in the
          document, but remain clearly identifiable. Preparation would entail collaborative
          programming and close consultation with Governments, including compatibility
          with country strategy notes wherever they exist.

      (b) All funds and programmes and United Nations information centres will be par
          of a single United Nations office under the Resident Coordinator as the
          designated representative of the Secretary-General and leader of the United
          Nations country team, who would be accredited to the head of Government.

      (c) Common premises of the United Nations at the country level will be named
          “UN House”. The office in South Africa will be the first such case with the
          designation of “UN House” coming into immediate effect.




                                                                                              /...
                                                        -54-




Governance of the funds and programmes

162. Enhanced governmental management of funds and programmes would be greatly
facilitated by greater integration of the oversight that Member States provide.6 It is
recommended that the UNDP/UNFPA and UNICEF Executive Boards continue to be convened
back to back, with joint meetings as appropriate and with joint committees comprising members
of both Boards to review issues and matters of common concern to all of the United Nations
Development Group constituent entities, including the collaborative country programming
produced by the United Nations Development Assistance Framework process.


 Recommendation:

 Member States are invited to consider arrangements for closer integration of the governance
 oversight of UNDP/UNFPA and UNICEF with consecutive and/or joint meetings of the
 existing Executive Boards, and the convening of joint committees to review issues and matters
 of common concern.

Fostering a constructive partnership between the United Nations and the Bretton Woods
institutions

163. The World Bank’s “Strategic Compact: Renewing the Bank’s Effectiveness to Figh
Poverty” focuses the World Bank on “human development ... environmentally and socially
sustainable development ... poverty reduction and economic management and finance, private
sector and infrastructure”. The Bank is also moving rapidly to decentralize its operations to the
regional and country level. The movement of the World Bank into areas similar to those
hitherto in the purview of the United Nations will bring additional resources to bear on similar
objectives. However, this brings added urgency to the task of ensuring an appropriate
distribution of responsibilities between the World Bank Group and the United Nations for the
benefit of programme countries. This should take the form of a functional rationalization in a
complementary and cooperative manner between the work of the United Nations and the World
Bank. Such a rationalization would enable both institutions to operate in the same sectors in a
complementary manner. This rationalization of functional roles and mandates will require the
support and endorsement of States members of the World Bank in its Executive Board and
Board of Governors. Governments play an important role in bringing the United Nations and the
World Bank together not just at the intergovernmental level, but at the country level as well.


    6
     The Economic and Social Council, in its decision 1995/51, requested “the United Nations funds and
programmes to improve coherence in their country programmes, inter alia, by considering the possibility of joint or
consecutive meetings of the Executive Boards, where practicable, or country programmes and by improving the link
between their country programmes and the country strategy notes, where in place, bearing in mind the need for
cooperation between external donors and the United Nations funds and programmes in this field.”

                                                                                                                /...
                                               -55-




National priorities, along with the active involvement of Governments, should serve as the basis
for closer coordination of common country assessments, the United Nations Developmen
Assistance Framework, and the World Bank’s policy planning frameworks.

164. The policies of IMF have an extremely important effect on the conditions affecting
development in developing countries. This is particularly true of their structural adjustmen
requirements. The Secretary-General welcomes the increased degree of consultation now taking
place between IMF and the United Nations at the country level on these issues and intends to
strengthen this relationship further.

The financing of development and technical cooperation

165. Resources for development need to be restored as rapidly as possible and made more
predictable to preserve the intensity of their operations. This should be followed by a ne
increase in ODA and an increase in resources channelled through the United Nations in order to
fulfil the mandates laid down by Member States. Such an increase should not be at the expense
of other bilateral or multilateral institutions but should result from an overall increase in ODA
based upon agreed global targets. All three principal sources of funding should be addressed --
voluntary, negotiated and private -- in development operations and an appropriate mix between
them ensured.

166. Core resources remain the basis for the mobilization of all other funds, and their
unpredictability has presented perhaps the most serious challenge to the smooth and effective
functioning of development operations. Financing of United Nations funds and programmes is
currently based on voluntary pledges on an annual basis.

167. It would be preferable if core resources could be made available in multi- instead of one-
year tranches. These contributions would be based upon programme targets established for the
period. Contributions would be based on the principle of burden-sharing among Member States,
the terms of which will need to be worked out. Negotiated pledges should mobilize additional
core resources for the implementation of priorities that emanate from global conferences and
from new country-based or regional requirements.

168. Mandates of various organizations emanating from recommendations of global conferences
require additional resources. There are a number of challenges facing the United Nations in this
regard and the key one is increasing the availability of resources for operational activities. The
mobilization of resources from private capital markets and other innovative financing systems
must also be addressed in order to enable countries to tap into the development potential
embodied in the private sector.

169. Mobilization of innovative new and additional resources requires a concerted, full-time
effort. An Office for Development Financing that does not duplicate or compete with the fund-

                                                                                                /...
                                                -56-




raising activities of the United Nations funds and programmes could meet this need. The
Office’s mission would be to seek new and additional resources for development through
innovative mechanisms and modalities. The new Office should, inter alia, explore the possibility
of creating non-profit entities to enable the United Nations Development Group to receive tax-
deductible contributions from individuals and especially private corporations at the country level.
The Office would also work to identify innovative mechanisms for mobilizing resources from
private capital markets for development.

      Action 11:

      (a) A proposal elaborating the details of a burden-sharing arrangement designed to
          increase core resources will be prepared by the Secretary-General for the
          consideration of Member States.

      (b) An Office for Development Financing will be established. Responsibility for
          setting up the Office will be assigned to the Deputy Secretary-General, who will
          draw up terms of reference and modalities of cooperation in consultation with
          the United Nations Development Group.


 Recommendation:

 That a new system of core resources consisting of voluntary contributions and negotiated
 pledges to be appropriated in multi-year tranches be established.


                    D. Environment, habitat and sustainable developmen

170. Of the challenges facing the world community in the next century, none will be more
formidable or pervasive as the attainment of a sustainable equilibrium between economic growth,
poverty reduction, social equity and the protection of the Earth’s resources, commons and life-
support systems.

171. The recently completed nineteenth special session of the General Assembly reviewed
programmes and prospects on the fifth anniversary of the United Nations Conference on
Environment and Development and the twenty-fifth anniversary of the Stockholm Conference
and underscored the difficulties and divisions that continue to impede progress towards
agreement on the cooperative measures required to deal with these issues and to ensure
enforcement of existing agreements.

172. A particularly important product of the Earth Summit has been the proliferation of new
actors in the field of environment and sustainable development and their expanding participation


                                                                                                /...
                                               -57-




in United Nations deliberations, negotiations and actions. This has led to changes in the scope
of the international and environmental agenda to focus on the environment as a critical
component of sustainable development. In addition, it is clear that the world of the twenty-firs
century will be predominantly urban and the transition to global sustainability will largely
depend on success in ensuring the sustainable development of our cities and towns. Sustainable
development is now understood to consist of a positive synthesis between the environmental,
social and economic dimensions of development.

173. In the United Nations, the Commission on Sustainable Development has become an
important policy forum; environmental capacities within major United Nations bodies and
specialized agencies have been developed; and the number of international environmental
conventions with autonomous governing bodies and secretariats has been growing.

174. Overall the response to the needs of developing countries for new and additional financial
resources has been disappointing and ODA has declined since the Rio Conference. The Global
Environment Facility (GEF), established to finance the incremental costs of certain sustainable
development projects, has functioned well and now needs to be replenished at higher levels and
its scope expanded. UNDP, the World Bank and other multilateral and bilateral funding
agencies are devoting a growing proportion of resources to sustainable development-related
projects and programmes. And with the increased role of private investment, the recent initiative
of the World Bank to develop, in cooperation with other interested parties, voluntary guidelines
for private investment, is a welcome development. Little progress has been made in developing
new and innovative sources of financing for the transition to sustainable development. However,
some promising prospects are emerging as, for example, the development of a system of
“offsets” to carbon dioxide emissions through joint implementation and emission trading, which
could produce significant new flows of resources to developing countries.

175. What has emerged clearly from the experience represented by these events is the need for
a more integrated systemic approach to policies and programmes throughout the whole range of
United Nations activities in the economic, social and development fields by mainstreaming the
Organization’s commitment to sustainable development. This requires closer cooperation and
interaction between the United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP) and the United Nations
Centre for Human Settlements (Habitat) and between both entities and other departments, funds
and programmes in the economic, social and development areas. It is necessary to that end to
strengthen the system of task managers under the Inter-Agency Committee on Sustainable
Development (IACSD) of the Administrative Committee on Coordination, in which both UNEP
and Habitat are actively involved. At the intergovernmental level, the fact that the Governing
Council of UNEP and the Commission on Human Settlements report to the General Assembly
should not preclude or inhibit this process as both report through the Economic and Social
Council.




                                                                                               /...
                                                      -58-




176. UNEP is the environmental voice of the United Nations and the principal source of the
environmental input into the work of the Commission on Sustainable Development. High
priority must be given to according to it the status, strength and access to resources it requires to
function effectively as the environmental agency of the world community. This has been
confirmed by the Nairobi Declaration, adopted by the UNEP Governing Council at its nineteenth
session, in February 1997. UNEP’s role as the focal point for harmonization and coordination of
environment-related activities must be strengthened, and the Secretary-General intends to lend his
full support to this process.

177. The important experience and capacities that UNEP has developed in the areas of
monitoring and assessment, through its GEMS and GRID programmes, constitute an invaluable
resource that must be further developed and enhanced in the period ahead; so too its key
functions as the forum for development of international policy, law and negotiation and
implementation of cooperative arrangements to deal with environmental issues, as a bridge
between science and policy-making as well as its interacting relationships with national
environmental organizations and agencies. One of the most notable achievements of UNEP has
been its contribution to the initiation, negotiation and support of some of the most importan
treaties that have been agreed in the international field. Many of these continue to depend on
continued support by UNEP. The operational projects at the country level that have been
financed by the Fund of UNEP can now be more appropriately funded by UNDP and other
sources. Accordingly, UNEP will discontinue implementation of such projects.

178. The High-level Advisory Board on Sustainable Development appointed by the Secretary-
General in July 19937 made a valuable contribution to the work of the Commission on
Sustainable Development during its first five years in analysing and elaborating a number of key
sustainable development issues. With the initiation by the Commission of promising new
arrangements for consultations with and participation in its work by various relevant civil society
actors, the Secretary-General believes that the functions of the High-level Advisory Board could
now be effectively performed through these processes.

179. On this twenty-fifth anniversary of the establishment of UNEP and in the light of the
recommendations of the Istanbul Conference on Human Settlements, it is most timely and
necessary to take immediate steps to strengthen UNEP and Habitat, while considering the
fundamental changes that may be required to clarify and focus their structures and functions
within a reformed United Nations in the economic, social and development fields as well as to
revitalize political and financial support for them. The nineteenth special session of the General
Assembly has provided useful guidance in this respect.




   7
       Pursuant to para. 38.18 of Agenda 21 and General Assembly resolution 47/191 of 22 December 1992.

                                                                                                          /...
                                              -59-




      Action 12: The Secretary-General will, in consultation with Governments, the
      Executive Director of the United Nations Environment Programme and the Executive
      Director of the United Nations Centre for Human Settlements, develop new measures
      for strengthening and restructuring the two organizations, based on General
      Assembly resolutions 2997 (XXVII) and 32/162 and taking into account the decisions
      and recommendations of the Governing Council of UNEP and the Commission on
      Human Settlements, and will make recommendations to the General Assembly at its
      fifty-third session.


 Recommendation:

 That the General Assembly decide to discontinue the High-level Advisory Board on
 Sustainable Development.


                                   E. Humanitarian affairs

180. The occurrence of complex humanitarian emergencies, i.e., large-scale humanitarian crises
in complicated political and military environments, often in the context of internal conflicts,
requires new approaches on the part of the international community. Humanitarian actions today
go beyond the saving of lives through relief operations and involve a wide range of efforts
covering early warning, prevention, provision of emergency assistance, advocacy of humanitarian
and human rights principles, protection and monitoring, with a view to ensuring a smooth
transition to longer-term development.

181. The mission of the United Nations in the humanitarian sector is first and foremost to
provide needy civilian victims of conflict and natural disasters, many of them refugees and
displaced persons, the majority women and children, with humanitarian assistance and protection,
which State authorities are often unable or unwilling to provide in crises.

182. The United Nations must further strengthen its capacity for launching coherent and
coordinated humanitarian actions, under the guiding principles of humanity, neutrality and
impartiality. In doing so, the United Nations must work in partnership with Governments, other
intergovernmental organizations and non-governmental organizations. Building on experiences to
date, further improvement in the coordination and management of humanitarian actions can be
achieved to ensure greater coherence, while enhancing accountability.

183. The Kurdish refugee crisis in 1991 clearly demonstrated that at the time the United
Nations system lacked the capacity to respond to a major humanitarian emergency. An
important lesson of that crisis was that the United Nations must develop an effective emergency
response capacity and must also establish an effective mechanism of coordination and


                                                                                             /...
                                                -60-




cooperation within the system by clarifying the allocation of responsibilities among the entities
concerned.

184. General Assembly resolution 46/182 recognized the need for a more coherent and
consolidated approach to humanitarian actions, and called for the designation by the Secretary-
General of a high-level official (Emergency Relief Coordinator), working under his direction and
supported by a secretariat. It also established the Inter-Agency Standing Committee (IASC),
chaired by the Emergency Relief Coordinator, to strengthen coordination, as well as the
consolidated appeal process and the Central Emergency Revolving Fund. The Secretary-General
established the Department of Humanitarian Affairs within the Secretariat in 1992 to support the
Emergency Relief Coordinator.

Towards a strengthened capacity to respond to humanitarian crisis

185. The functions of the Emergency Relief Coordinator and the role of the Department of
Humanitarian Affairs were carefully reviewed in the preparation of the present report. The
importance of the functions of the Emergency Relief Coordinator has been confirmed. General
Assembly resolution 46/182 covers the broad range of humanitarian actions. The Department of
Humanitarian Affairs, the support structure for the Emergency Relief Coordinator, has been
successful in implementing part of its mandate. However, the fact that the Department of
Humanitarian Affairs has undertaken some operational activities in a limited and ad hoc manner
without being adequately equipped with capacities and expertise has diluted the importance of
the Emergency Relief Coordinator’s core functions. More than five years after the arrangements
were put in place, it is now necessary to equip the Emergency Relief Coordinator with an
appropriate and more appropriate support structure.

Role of the Emergency Relief Coordinator, the Office of the Emergency Relief Coordinator, the
Inter-Agency Standing Committee and the consolidated appeal process

186. In accordance with the provisions of General Assembly resolution 46/182, the Emergency
Relief Coordinator’s functions will be more focused on three core functions, which will be
significantly strengthened: (a) policy development and coordination functions in support of the
Secretary-General, ensuring that all humanitarian issues, including those which fall between gaps
in existing mandates of agencies such as protection and assistance for internally displaced
persons, are addressed. In this connection, it is also important that adequate liaison is effected
with the Department of Peacekeeping Operations, the Department of Political Affairs, the United
Nations Development Group and the Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights;
(b) advocacy of humanitarian issues with political organs, notably the Security Council; and
(c) coordination of humanitarian emergency response, by ensuring that an appropriate response
mechanism is established, through IASC consultations, on the ground.



                                                                                                /...
                                                 -61-




187. In order to allow the Emergency Relief Coordinator to focus on the core functions
described above, operational aspects of responsibilities that currently fall to the Department of
Humanitarian Affairs will be redistributed in other parts of the United Nations system. While
the functions related to coordination of natural disaster relief would remain with the Emergency
Relief Coordinator, the functions of disaster prevention, mitigation and preparedness relate to
national capabilities and are more appropriately situated in UNDP. The functions related to
demining activities will be transferred to the Department of Peacekeeping Operations, together
with the responsibility for the management of the Voluntary Trust Fund for Assistance in Mine-
Clearance. The management of the Iraq Programme, established by Security Council resolution
986 (1991), will be handled by a special unit within the secretariat.

188. An Office of the Emergency Relief Coordinator will replace the Department of
Humanitarian Affairs, whose core functions will be transferred to the new Office. The
Emergency Relief Coordinator’s Office will be relatively small in size and well-focused on its
core activities. The Emergency Relief Coordinator will benefit from well-qualified senior staff
seconded by the IASC members. The Emergency Relief Coordinator will have direct access to
the Secretary-General, as Assembly resolution 46/182 stipulates. The Emergency Relief
Coordinator will be responsible to the Secretary-General and act as his main adviser on
humanitarian issues.

189. General Assembly resolution 46/182 clearly recognized that humanitarian actions entail a
wide range of efforts that go beyond the provision of emergency relief assistance. This should
be more accurately reflected in respect of the responsibilities of the Emergency Relief
Coordinator. In this context, it is recommended that the Emergency Relief Coordinator be
renamed the United Nations Humanitarian Assistance Coordinator. It is also recommended tha
the General Assembly revise the responsibilities of the Emergency Relief Coordinator with a
view to transferring the responsibilities related to the coordination of natural disaster mitigation
activities, which are mainly capacity-building, to UNDP.

190. Under the new arrangement, the Emergency Relief Coordinator will chair IASC, which
will be further strengthened. In order to enhance a rapid response capacity based on coheren
policy, a Steering Committee of IASC will be established, which will comprise UNHCR, WFP,
UNICEF, UNDP, a representative of the International Committee of the Red Cross and a
representative of the non-governmental organization community. The full IASC membership will
be informed of consultations in the Steering Committee and inputs will be sought as appropriate.

191. The consolidated appeal process will be further improved and continue to serve as a
vehicle for resource mobilization in the humanitarian sector under the responsibility of the
Emergency Relief Coordinator. As the aim of humanitarian actions always must be to seek
durable solutions, appeals for rehabilitation and reconstruction will be included in the
consolidated appeal process, where appropriate, based on inputs provided by the United Nations


                                                                                                  /...
                                               -62-




Development Group. Likewise, funding requirements for human rights field operations will be
included in the consolidated appeal process, where appropriate.

      Action 13:

      (a) An Office of the Emergency Relief Coordinator, headed by an under-secretary-
          general, will be established at United Nations Headquarters.

      (b) The Emergency Relief Coordinator will focus on the core functions identified in
          General Assembly resolution 46/182. The Department of Humanitarian Affairs
          will be discontinued in its present form.

      (c) Some of the functions of the Department of Humanitarian Affairs will be
          redistributed within the United Nations system, as indicated above.

      (d) The Inter-Agency Standing Committee will be further strengthened and continue
          to be the main consultative body for humanitarian agencies, chaired by the
          Emergency Relief Coordinator. An IASC Steering Committee will be established
          with six members, as indicated above.

      (e) The Inter-Agency Standing Committee will be asked to identify measures to
          harmonize processes and further enhance the consolidated appeal process to
          ensure that appeals are needs-based and prioritized, taking into account the
          comparative advantage of each agency.

      (f) In the field, a lead agency may be designated by the Emergency Relief
          Coordinator to coordinate complex emergencies.

192. At the field level, the United Nations Resident Coordinator acts as Humanitarian
Coordinator in normal circumstances. However, in complex emergencies where coordination of
policies and activities at the regional level is required, or where a country-based Residen
Coordinator for functional reasons cannot serve effectively as Humanitarian Coordinator, a lead
agency could be designated that will be responsible for all aspects of humanitarian coordination
in the field. This arrangement, which will streamline and avoid multiple layers of coordination
in the field, was adopted in the former Yugoslavia.

Governance

193. The Emergency Relief Coordinator must maintain impartiality in carrying out the
Coordinator’s functions, and needs to be supported by and be held accountable to Governments
on overall humanitarian issues. It may be desirable in due course to give consideration to
establishing a governing board for humanitarian affairs, which could give policy directives on

                                                                                              /...
                                              -63-




overall humanitarian issues and oversee the coordination of humanitarian response. In the
meantime it is recommended that a humanitarian affairs segment of the Economic and Social
Council be established as soon as possible to give guidance on overall humanitarian issues and
coordination.


 Recommendations:

 That the General Assembly designate the Emergency Relief Coordinator as the United Nations
 Humanitarian Assistance Coordinator, and transfer the Emergency Relief Coordinator’s
 responsibilities related to the coordination of natural disaster mitigation activities to UNDP.

 That a humanitarian affairs segment of the Economic and Social Council be established as
 soon as possible.


                                       F. Human rights

194. Developments in the present decade have underscored that human rights are inherent to the
promotion of peace, security, economic prosperity and social equity. Governments increasingly
recognize that respect for human rights, including the rights of women, is a precondition for
political stability and socio-economic progress. In keeping with this realization, the World
Conference on Human Rights held in Vienna in 1993 underlined that “all human rights are
universal, indivisible and interdependent and interrelated”.

195. As a result of these developments, the mandate of the United Nations has evolved
considerably, as reflected in the priorities set by the Vienna Conference and the growing
demands for a human rights presence in United Nations field operations. Following a
recommendation of the Conference, the General Assembly, in its resolution 48/141 of
20 December 1993, created the post of High Commissioner for Human Rights and assigned to
the High Commissioner principal responsibilities for United Nations human rights activities under
the direction and authority of the Secretary-General. The Centre for Human Rights, the main
entity of the Secretariat in this field, was placed under the High Commissioner’s overall
supervision.

196. By virtue of its worldwide membership, the Organization provides a unique institutional
framework to promote human rights and to develop the legal, monitoring and operational
instruments that can better uphold their universal character while maintaining a full
understanding of, and respect for, the broad range of national and cultural diversities. A major
task for the future will be to enhance the human rights programme and integrate it into the broad
range of the Organization’s activities, including in the development and humanitarian areas.



                                                                                              /...
                                              -64-




Restructuring and consolidation of the human rights programme

197. The increasing demands on the United Nations human rights programme and the need to
undertake responsibilities for which it had no previous experience revealed a number of
shortcomings that reduced its impact at a time of increasing demands. The programme has since
been the object of careful review by the Office of Internal Oversight Services and a private
consulting firm. Following their recommendations, a major reorganization has been
implemented. The streamlined structure now in place reflects the priorities of the work
programme and is focused on three areas of activity: (a) information, analysis and policy
development; (b) support to human rights bodies and organs; and (c) actions for the promotion
and protection of human rights.

198. The General Assembly charged the High Commissioner with the task of carrying out the
“overall supervision of the Centre for Human Rights”. In order to relieve the High
Commissioner of day-to-day management responsibilities, the Office of the High Commissioner
and the Centre were maintained as two separate structures. Past experience, however, has shown
that inadequate coordination and complementarity between the two entities hindered performance,
diminished the impact of human rights activities and resulted in a lack of appropriate
coordination of related activities throughout the Organization.

      Action 14: The reorganization of the human rights secretariat is to be fully
      implemented. Under the new High Commissioner for Human Rights, both offices
      will be consolidated in a single unit, to be called the Office of the High Commissioner
      for Human Rights. The Deputy High Commissioner will assist and provide
      management support to the High Commissioner and manage the Office in her
      absence.


                    Coordination with other United Nations programmes

199. The connection between human rights and peace and security is laid out in the Charter and
has been amply confirmed by recent experience. An analysis of developments and trends in the
area of human rights should be incorporated in the early warning activities of the organization;
human rights are a key element in peacemaking and peace-building efforts and should be
addressed in the context of humanitarian operations. The capacity of the Office of the High
Commissioner to provide support in this regard is one of the objectives of the curren
reorganization.

200. The provision of technical assistance has been on the rise. Advisory services financed
through the Voluntary Fund for Technical Cooperation are given to Governments that so reques
to develop national capacities, institutions and structures including advocacy, information,
education and training of law enforcement officials, judges, immigration officers and

                                                                                             /...
                                                -65-




peacekeepers. Other entities of the Organization also provide technical cooperation in areas tha
have a bearing on human rights, such as the promotion of democratic governance, strengthening
of the rule of law, reform of the judiciary, training of police forces and programmes that touch
on the Convention on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights and on the Convention on the Rights
of the Child. Better coordination among the entities concerned would enhance the impact of
these activities and reduce their overall cost. The Office of the High Commissioner should be
able to provide its advice for the design of technical assistance projects and participate in needs
assessments missions.

201. The human rights programme is represented in the work of the Executive Committees on
Peace and Security, Economic and Social Affairs, Development Operations and Humanitarian
Affairs. There is room for further integration by ensuring that contacts are held in a regular
way, rather than on an ad hoc basis, and strengthening the representation of the Office of the
High Commissioner at Headquarters.

      Action 15:

      (a) The Office of the High Commissioner will assess the work carried out on human
          rights issues in the Executive Committees and will regularly participate in every
          stage of the Organization’s activities in relation to actual or potential conflicts or
          post-conflict situations that have a human rights dimension.

      (b) The High Commissioner will undertake an analysis of the technical assistance
          provided by the United Nations entities in areas related to human rights and
          formulate proposals for improving complementarity of action.

      (c) The representation of the High Commissioner’s office at Headquarters will be
          upgraded and strengthened.


                     Support for intergovernmental processes, monitoring
                                bodies and special procedures

202. The intergovernmental machinery includes the Commission on Human Rights, which
reports to the Economic and Social Council, which in turn reports to the General Assembly, and
its Subcommission on the Prevention of Discrimination and Protection of Minorities. In addition
to these legislative bodies, there are six committees that receive reports from States parties to the
corresponding human rights covenants and conventions. Furthermore, the Commission on
Human Rights has established a growing number of special procedures that include special
rapporteurs, representatives, experts and working groups. There have been more than 30 such
instrumentalities in the past two years.


                                                                                                  /...
                                                -66-




203. The need to harmonize and rationalize the work carried out under the treaty bodies and the
human rights mechanisms and procedures was underlined in the Vienna Declaration and
Programme of Action. Meetings among the persons chairing the treaty bodies have been held
periodically during the past years. Since 1994, meetings have also been held among the special
rapporteurs, representatives, experts and chairpersons of the working groups. These practices
have improved information-sharing among the concerned mechanisms; there is room for further
streamlining of their work by facilitating coordination through the timing and venue of their
meetings.

204. The existing bodies and mechanisms constitute a large and increasingly intricate network.
While to a large extent their work has a cumulative effect, there is a risk of dispersion and lack
of consistency that may affect their impact. A careful review is called for to rationalize the
system.

205. The complexity of the human rights machinery and the subsequent burden of reporting
obligations have strained the resources of the Secretariat. Weaknesses in the servicing units have
limited their capacity to contribute to the rationalization and effectiveness of the work carried ou
by the machinery they serve. One of the main purposes of the restructuring of the human rights
programme is to enhance the capacity of the servicing units.

206. Efforts to streamline the agenda of the Commission on Human Rights have produced
valuable proposals. Progress has been made through the biennialization of items under
consideration. While proposals for streamlining the agenda have so far failed to obtain the
required support, they constitute a useful precedent for future discussions on this matter.

      Action 16:

      (a) The Secretary-General will ask the High Commissioner for Human Rights to
          review the human rights machinery and develop recommendations on possible
          ways to streamline and rationalize it.

      (b) Actions under way in the context of the restructuring of the human rights
          programme to strengthen and coordinate the substantive and technical suppor
          to the legislative bodies, monitoring committees and special procedures will be
          given the highest priority. The establishment of common data banks of
          information, research and analysis to assist these bodies will be accelerated.


                                         G. Civil society

207. The emergence of non-State actors has been a growing influence on our changing
international environment. Non-governmental organizations are the clearest manifestation of

                                                                                                  /...
                                                -67-




what is referred to as “civil society”, that is, the sphere in which social movements organize
themselves around objectives, constituencies and thematic interests. These movements include
specific groups such as women, youth and indigenous people. Other actors have also taken on
an increasingly important role in shaping national and international agendas. They include local
authorities, mass media, business and industry, professional associations, religious and cultural
organizations and the intellectual and research communities.

208. The emergence -- or, in several parts of the world, the re-emergence -- of civil society is
linked to two interlocking processes: the quest for a more democratic, transparent, accountable
and enabling governance and the increasing preponderance of market-based approaches to
national and global economic management, which have resulted in redefining the role of the
State and vested new and broader responsibilities in market and civil society actors in the pursui
of growth and well-being. In this overall context, a vibrant civil society is critical to processes
of democratization and empowerment.

209. Not all non-State actors are, however, benign. While the role of civil society is looked a
principally in terms of promoting ideals and activities that represent citizens’ interests and
promote public good, there has also been an ominous growth in the activities and influence of
other elements, including terrorists, drug traffickers and those engaged in organizing prostitution
and trafficking in women and children -- “uncivil society” -- all of whom have taken advantage
of the processes of globalization. No one Government or organization can tackle alone the
threats this poses to societies. New multilateral approaches and new partnerships with non-State
actors must be devised to contain and reverse this trend. Member States pledged at the fiftieth
session of the General Assembly to “act together to defeat the threats to States and people posed
by terrorism, in all its forms and manifestations, and transnational organized crime and the illici
trade in arms and the production and consumption of and trafficking in illicit drugs”.

210. Over the past two decades, issues such as people-centred sustainable development,
environmental protection, gender equality and rights of indigenous people have been prominen
on the international agenda with the encouragement and advocacy of non-State actors. Public
participation in world events, especially the major conferences convened by the United Nations
in the 1990s, has acquired true meaning, with tens of thousands of organizations from around the
world being involved, from the local to the global level, in the identification of priorities and
issues and avenues for addressing them.

211. The statistics relating to the number of non-governmental organizations granted
consultative status by the Economic and Social Council are equally telling: 41 in 1948; 377 in
1968; and over 1,200 at present. At the operational level, the relationship between non-State
actors and United Nations funds and programmes with operational responsibilities, such as
UNICEF, UNHCR, UNFPA and WFP, has evolved significantly in the last two decades and
important networks of contacts have been established. The operational competence, flexibility
and knowledge of local conditions of non-governmental organizations, as well as complementary

                                                                                                 /...
                                                -68-




resources which they themselves bring to humanitarian programmes, make non-governmental
organizations key operational partners and implementing agents. The National Councils for
Sustainable Development and similar entities established in some 100 countries as a result of the
Rio Conference on Environment and Development represent promising new instruments for
bringing together representatives of both Governments and civil society.

212. Virtually no area of United Nations involvement, at either the policy or the operational
level, has been left unchanged by this process. Overall, civil society’s increasing influence is
contributing to a process of enlargement of international cooperation and spurring the United
Nations system and other intergovernmental structures towards greater transparency and
accountability and closer linkages between national and international levels of decision-making
and implementing.

213. Non-governmental organizations and other civil society actors are now perceived not only
as disseminators of information or providers of services but also as shapers of policy, be it in
peace and security matters, in development or in humanitarian affairs. The involvement of
non-governmental organizations and other actors, such as parliamentarians, local authorities and
business leaders, in the United Nations global conferences demonstrates this. It would now be
difficult to imagine organizing a global event and formulating multilateral agreements and
declarations without the active participation of non-governmental organizations.

214. Of particular importance is the relationship of the United Nations and the organizations of
the United Nations system with the business community. The impact of the private sector, in
both developing and developed countries, is of growing importance, and it would be timely to
develop better means of consultation between the United Nations and the business community.
Such consultations would enable the concerns and interests of both sides to be more fully
understood. The International Chamber of Commerce and the World Economic Forum have both
taken the initiative to establish mechanisms for this purpose and encourage their use by other
members of the United Nations family. The Secretary-General plans to utilize these
mechanisms.

215. For all the reasons mentioned above, and as an essential part of reforming the United
Nations, the Secretary-General is of the view that the Organization needs to review and update
the ways in which it interacts with civil society, as it seeks to serve both the Governments and
the peoples of the world. As the Member States and observers of the United Nations declared
on the occasion of the fiftieth anniversary of the United Nations: “We recognize that our
common work will be the more successful if it is supported by all concerned actors of the
international community, including non-governmental organizations, multilateral financial
institutions, regional organizations and all actors of civil society. We will welcome and facilitate
such support, as appropriate.”



                                                                                                   /...
                                              -69-




216. There are other constituencies of growing importance to the United Nations that warran
special consideration. Parliamentarians are a primary case in point. The agreement of
24 July 1996 between the United Nations and the Inter-Parliamentary Union (see General
Assembly resolutions 50/15 and 51/7) provides a promising basis for extending the United
Nations consultative relationships with this important group.

      Action 17:

      (a) A series of gatherings involving eminent leaders of different sectors of civil
          society and the Secretary-General will be initiated. Constituencies will include
          academicians, organized labour, non-governmental organizations, private
          business, youth and the foundation community.

      (b) All substantive departments of the United Nations will designate a
          non-governmental organization liaison officer to facilitate access by civil society
          to the United Nations. At the country level, where appropriate, the United
          Nations system should create more opportunities for tripartite cooperation with
          Governments and civil society. Training programmes for United Nations staff
          will include a component dedicated to cooperation with civil society. This will be
          reflected in the curricula of the United Nations Staff College.

      (c) The Secretary-General will consult with the Administrative Committee on
          Coordination with a view to establishing a jointly funded inter-agency business
          liaison service to be named the United Nations Enterprise Liaison Service,
          patterned along the lines of the Non-Governmental Liaison Service.

      (d) Arrangements will be made with leading business organizations to establish
          improved mechanisms for continuing the dialogue between representatives of
          business and the United Nations.


                        VI. ENHANCING SUPPORT CAPACITIES

                               A. Financing the Organization

217. The need to put the Organization on a sound financial footing is an essential part of and a
prerequisite to the success for reform. The means to finance the Organization is through
assessed contributions. The only way for this to work is for all Member States to pay their
contributions in full, on time and without preconditions. This has not happened and is no
happening. Article 19 has not proven to be the deterrent that it was meant to be. It is too
lenient. Attempts at introducing sanctions and incentives have been put forward and rejected
time and again.

                                                                                               /...
                                                -70-




218. The precarious financial situation and the perpetual cash-flow crisis require ongoing
balancing acts to meet current commitments while making it difficult to stem the tide of
mounting debts owed to Member States contributing troops to peacekeeping operations. In the
light of the trends regarding peacekeeping operations, which will reduce the availability of cash,
the cash flow is expected to worsen significantly in the year to come and may bring the
Organization to a halt. In this day and age, no other association or organization could accept the
rules under which the United Nations operates and survives.

219. The chart at right shows the
pattern of cash balances in the
regular budget from 1991-1997.
There has been a discernible shif
over that period. From
1991-1994, there was a recurring,
but usually minor and short-lived
negative cash position. In 1995, a
new pattern began and it became
necessary to borrow extensively
from peacekeeping. This situation
has recurred through 1997, with
longer periods of borrowing and
larger amounts.

220. In the absence of an adequate level of capital or any reserves and in the light of the failure
of some Member States to discharge their treaty obligations regarding the prompt and full
payment of assessed contributions, the Secretary-General believes it essential to find immediate
practical measures to complement the ongoing search for a more fundamental solution of the
Organization’s financial situation. He challenges Member States to put forward ideas to induce
delinquent Member States to pay and restore the financial solvency of this Organization.

221. For his part, the Secretary-General proposes that Member States establish a Revolving
Credit Fund, initially capitalized at a level of up to $1 billion through voluntary contributions or
any other means of financing that Member States may wish to suggest. Such a fund would be
available to the Secretary-General to finance, on a recourse basis, newly arising overdue
assessment payments of Member States. Notwithstanding that acceptance of the budget through
a General Assembly resolution confirms the treaty obligation of Member States, in practice
delays in payment have frequently occurred. Accordingly, it is suggested that Member States
that fall 90 days past due in meeting their assessment obligations be notified by the Secretaria
that they are in arrears and asked to specify the future date of such payment. This notification
should be in such legal form as will allow the Secretary-General to pledge it as security for
borrowing at such time as he considers necessary from the Revolving Credit Fund.
Reimbursement to the Fund would be made when Member States paid their arrears. Member

                                                                                                  /...
                                               -71-




States that have had their arrears financed through the Fund would bear the cost of such
financing through adjustment of amounts owed to them by the Organization for prior year
surpluses not yet reimbursed. The surplus balances of Member States that have provided the
voluntary contributions would receive offsetting credit adjustments. The suggested financing
arrangements would not modify in any way the determination of amounts in arrears for the
purposes of Article 19 of the Charter.

222. The Secretary-General would welcome other suggestions from Member States as to how to
resolve the issue of assured predictable cash flow.


 Recommendations:

 That a Revolving Credit Fund capitalized at a level of up to $1 billion be established through
 voluntary contributions or any other means of financing that Member States may wish to
 suggest to provide liquidity as an advance on Member States’ outstanding contributions.

 That any unspent balances under the regular budget, at the end of the fiscal period, in future
 be retained.


                                        B. Managemen

223. Country after country is transforming the management of the public sector in response to
the dual challenge of needing to meet growing demands within constrained resources. Facing a
similar challenge and building on lessons learned from Member States, the United Nations has
undertaken an ambitious programme of managerial reform to ensure that management supports
the substantive work of the Organization, and that the resources entrusted to the Organization are
used in the most effective and efficient way to achieve the mandates established by the Member
States.

224. The Secretary-General has set forth a new vision for management that will support a more
relevant, more effective United Nations that better serves the Member States; a simplified
structure that avoids duplication and achieves greater impact; empowered and responsible staff
and managers; a leaner and more efficient United Nations Secretariat; and an organization tha
fosters management excellence and is accountable for achieving results determined by the
Member States.

225. The Office of Internal Oversight Services, a key element in the ongoing reform process,
has produced reports that have been an extremely valuable source of reference and guidance in
the development of this vision and the Secretary-General’s reform measures. The Office of
Internal Oversight Services, together with the Board of Auditors and the Joint Inspection Uni


                                                                                                  /...
                                               -72-




(JIU) provide a range of oversight functions and services that are indispensable to the effective
functioning of the Organization.

226. The Secretariat can be a catalyst for system-wide change; successful reform in the
Secretariat will have a critical impact across the system. Although much remains to be done,
there have been extensive efforts on the part of individual managers to streamline management.
Today, every department is contributing to the transformation of the management of the United
Nations, seeking to enhance the services that are provided by the Organization and, at the same
time, reducing overhead costs. Examples of ongoing managerial reforms in the Secretariat and
in the funds and programmes are described in the annex to the present report.

227. As part of the Secretary-General’s reform initiatives, managers have been asked to
accelerate the process of transforming the management of the Organization with an emphasis on
enhancing effectiveness and service to Member States as well as achieving savings to create a
“dividend for development.” Reform is being pursued through the strategies outlined below.


                  Strategy 1: Strengthening the staff of the United Nations

228. To fulfil its mission, and to transform itself to meet the challenges of the next century, the
Organization depends on the quality and competence of its staff. Article 101 (3) of the Charter,
prescribes that “the paramount consideration in the employment of the staff and in the
determination of the conditions of service shall be the necessity of securing the highest standards
of efficiency, competence and integrity.” This vision will drive the Secretary-General’s urgen
efforts to improve the quality and performance of the staff of the United Nations to enhance the
effectiveness with which its human resources are managed and to strengthen the international
civil service.

229. The Secretariat of the future will be somewhat smaller, better trained, more versatile, more
mobile, better managed and better integrated as a global team. The dedication of United Nations
staff, many of whom in recent years have given or risked their lives on behalf of the
Organization, is impressive. Yet management of human resources has come to be characterized
by labour-intensive day-to-day staff administration and mechanical compliance with complex
rules and cumbersome processes that are seen as impeding rather than supporting programme
delivery and not doing enough to maximize the contributions of staff.

230. There are other important issues to be tackled, including:

      -    The Organization’s goals for geographical and gender representation have yet to be
           achieved; for example fewer than 20 per cent of senior level posts are filled by
           women and only 36 per cent overall and a number of Member States are still
           unrepresented;

                                                                                                /...
                                               -73-




      -   The average age of United Nations staff is 49, with only 14 per cent below the age of
          40, and fewer than 5 per cent under 35. Over the next decade, projections indicate
          that at least 4,500 staff will retire from the Organization. This presents an
          opportunity -- and a challenge -- to rejuvenate the Organization, to provide career
          growth for serving staff with demonstrated ability and potential, to bring in needed
          skills and make significant progress on geographical and gender representation;

      -   The Organization employs more staff on personnel work -- a ratio of 1:37 -- than
          many other organizations of similar size and complexity;

      -   United Nations managers, including senior officials, have not, traditionally, been
          trained to manage effectively the human resources entrusted to them, with mandatory
          people management training introduced only in 1995 to enhance management’s
          capacity for leadership, strategic vision and support for staff development;

      -   The appointment of senior officials by the Secretary-General is critical to the
          Organization’s performance. The Secretary-General has to balance the professional,
          managerial and leadership qualities required to ensure high standards of performance;
          in few areas do the Secretary-General’s responsibilities have a greater impact on the
          effectiveness and performance of the Organization than in making these senior
          appointments.

231. Actions are under way to address these issues, building on the Secretary-General’s human
resources management strategy, which has been endorsed by the General Assembly. A new
Code of Conduct has been agreed and is to be submitted to the Assembly at its fifty-second
session for consideration. A modest increase in the training budget is part of the 1998-1999
programme budget proposal. More action is needed urgently, however, to manage the human
resources of the United Nations in the most effective way.

232. Some issues go beyond the United Nations Secretariat and need to be considered in the
context of the wider United Nations system. For example, the International Civil Service
Commission (ICSC) has primary responsibility for determining conditions of service in the
United Nations system that affect the Organization’s ability to attract and retain staff of the
requisite competence and calibre. It is essential that the staff of the United Nations be fairly
compensated and that their conditions be determined in an objective manner. A re-examination
of the composition, mandate and functioning of ICSC will contribute to the success of reform
measures being undertaken by the organizations of the common system.

233. The United Nations approach to human resources management will be the subject of a
thorough review to be conducted by a task force established for this purpose. The task force
will be comprised of human resources experts from both the private and the public sectors with
inputs from management and staff. By the beginning of 1998, the Secretary-General will

                                                                                               /...
                                             -74-




complete the review and take action on a number of critical areas in human resources
management falling within his authority. Matters requiring action by the General Assembly will
be submitted for consideration at the fifty-third session.

      Action 18: By the beginning of 1998, a fundamental review will have been
      undertaken, significant progress made and the preparation of a programme of
      further action prepared for the management of human resources in the Organization.
      This will include identifying and undertaking concrete steps in recruitment and
      placement, human resources planning, career service and compensation packages,
      career development and mobility, performance management and staff-managemen
      consultation, with the aim of:

          Creating a “global team” for the United Nations of the future, including a more
          mobile career staff for serving the global Secretariat, both designed better to
          support programme delivery and career development;

          Streamlining recruitment and placement policies and procedures to serve better
          the needs of programme managers, to provide career growth for serving staff, to
          bring in needed skills and to make significant progress on geographical and
          gender representation, with an early goal of having all Member States
          represented no later than 1999;

          Simplifying processes to their essentials and delegating maximum authority and
          responsibility for human resources management within clear systems and lines of
          accountability better to support programme delivery and reduce administrative
          costs;

          Encouraging enhanced performance, through rewards and recognition, measures
          for dealing with substandard performance and accountability for results;

          Enhancing staff-management communication and consultation with a view to
          maximizing staff contributions to the reform process and enhanced
          organizational performance; and

          Supporting the delivery of programmes by giving managers greater flexibility
          and achieving an optimal mix of permanent and fixed-term staff.

      Action 19: Establish a one-time training and redeployment programme funded with
      up to $15 million from appropriated resources to assist staff affected by the measures
      outlined in the context of reform.



                                                                                            /...
                                                -75-




      Action 20: The Secretary-General will seek the advice of an informal group of
      independent advisers on senior appointments.


 Recommendations:

 That the General Assembly initiate a review of the International Civil Service Commission,
 including its mandate, membership and functioning in order to increase its effectiveness in
 meeting the challenges facing the United Nations system of organizations.

 That the General Assembly approve the Code of Conduct. Once approved, it will become an
 integral part of the United Nations Staff Regulations and Rules.


              Strategy 2: Create a “dividend for development” from savings in
                          administration and other overhead costs

234. The United Nations has been spending too high a percentage of its regular budget on
administration and other overhead costs, including public information. On 17 March 1997, the
Secretary-General set a specific goal to reduce such costs in the regular budget of the Secretaria
by one third and reallocate this “dividend” to economic and social activities, reducing overhead
and information costs from 38 per cent to 25 per cent of the United Nations regular budge
(see figure). The Secretary-General is now proposing the creation of a Development Account to
be funded from resulting savings. With savings achieved in the context of the 1998-1999
proposals for the regular budget and with Member States’ support, for example by reducing the
number of meetings and documents, it would be possible to deliver an efficiency dividend
growing to at least $200 million for the biennium beginning 2002. The Secretary-General aims
to deliver this dividend for development and proposes to initiate the account with savings
achieved in the context of the 1996-1997 regular budget.




                                                                                                /...
                                                       -76-




235. Savings of this magnitude are possible. Over
the last year, managers and staff members across
the Secretariat have designed and initiated more
than 550 efficiency projects that are enhancing
services, reducing duplication, speeding up
processes, obtaining economies of scale, and
making better use of information technology
(see figure). As of 30 June, some 265 of these
projects had been completed and all are contributing
to managerial improvements and to the
Organization’s ability to live within the reduced
resources appropriated by the General Assembly.8
This shows that the people who do the work
understand the problems and can often find the best solutions to improve value and service.
Managers are now being asked to accelerate the process of transforming the management of the
Organization with an emphasis on enhancing effectiveness and service to Member States as well
as achieving savings to create the dividend for development.

        Action 21: The central administrative and support offices as well as every
        department and office will be given specific savings targets to reduce their
        administrative and other overhead costs over the next two bienniums in order to
        create a dividend for development growing to at least $200 million for the biennium
        beginning 1 January 2002, to be available for reallocation to a Development Account.

        Action 22: Building on the lessons of the efficiency reviews and in close coordination
        with the budget process and targets, departments and offices will continue to carry
        out management reviews to enhance the delivery of mandated programmes,
        strengthen services to Member States and identify ways to achieve the targets set for
        the reduction of overhead costs.


 Recommendation:

 That the General Assembly establish an account to be funded from savings from reductions in
 administration and other overhead costs and prescribe the specific purposes and associated
 performance criteria for the use of such resources.




    8
      Strengthening of the United Nations system Review of the efficiency of the administrative and financial
functioning of the United Nations. Letter dated 21 April 1997 from the Secretary-General to the President of the
General Assembly (A/51/873).

                                                                                                                   /...
                                                -77-




           Strategy 3: Enhance the flexibility and responsibility of line managers

236. Too often, the delivery of mandated programmes is hampered by excessive bureaucratic
procedures and rules, with responsibility for management of resources in the hands of
administrators who have no accountability for programme delivery. This is both ineffective and
inefficient. Managers must have decision-making authority and responsibility for financial and
human resources so that they can carry out, and be held accountable for, the tasks that they have
been given.

237. Work is proceeding on an integrated accountability system that delegates more day-to-day
authority while establishing clear lines of responsibility, clarifying objectives and performance
standards and establishing appropriate oversight, rewards and sanctions. The Secretary-General
is using his full authority to conduct a pilot test of innovative managerial approaches in the
Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean (ECLAC), the United Nations
Office at Vienna and Conference Services as a possible launching pad for additional innovation
Secretariat-wide.

      Action 23: The Secretary-General will take steps to delegate maximum authority,
      responsibility and full accountability to line managers for the management of human
      and financial resources.


                     Strategy 4: Simplify processes, procedures and rules

238. A main purpose of rules and administrative processes is to support the accomplishment of
mandated activities while assuring transparency and accountability. This has not always been the
case in the United Nations owing to obsolete issuances, overregulation, too many layers of rules
and poor access to them. Often, compliance with too many rules and procedures has become an
end in itself, frustrating managers and threatening the efficient delivery of mandated
programmes. This has especially been the case in the area of human resources. Thus, the
Secretary-General has initiated a complete reform of rules and administrative issuances with the
goal of reducing and modernizing the rules of the Organization, facilitating compliance and
making the rules more accessible, including electronically.

239. The Secretary-General has also initiated a comprehensive programme to streamline the
central administration of the Organization and to simplify its processes and is introducing
changes to procurement processes and those relating to human resources management, including
recruitment, the processing of staff benefits and classification of staff. This will alleviate some
of the burden on the Office of Human Resources Management, allowing it to play a more
strategic policy, advisory and monitoring role. Where changes require the approval of the
General Assembly, they will be submitted for consideration and decision.


                                                                                                 /...
                                               -78-




      Action 24: The rules and administrative issuances of the Organization will be
      reviewed and rationalized.

      Action 25: A major simplification of procurement and human resource managemen
      processes will be completed by December 1997 and financial and other processes by
      December 1998.


            Strategy 5: Results-based budgeting: shift from micro-managemen
                                  to macro-accountability

240. To further strengthen the management of the Organization, the Secretary-General is
proposing that the United Nations place greater emphasis on results in its planning, budgeting
and reporting and that the General Assembly moves the budget of the United Nations from inpu
accounting to accountability for results. Following a trend in many developed and developing
countries, this means shifting the focus of planning, budgeting, reporting and oversight from how
things are done to what is accomplished. It means identifying the actual costs of producing
results and allocating resources accordingly. This new approach will be the basis for shifting
from micro-management in the budget process to what could become a new era of cooperation,
transparency and accountability for achieving the outcomes that Member States determine.

241. The Secretary-General intends to enhance performance reporting of outputs while ensuring
that information is available in the context of the budget process at an input level. The ECLAC,
United Nations Office at Vienna and Conference Services management pilots will be used to
develop better performance measures and increased accountability and managerial flexibility.
The newly constituted Department of Management will work with programme managers to
establish performance standards, providing training and monitoring performance.


 Recommendation:

 That the General Assembly review the existing arrangements governing the planning,
 programming and budgeting process in order to enhance their role in providing strategic
 direction, establishing better performance yardsticks and reporting and focusing more on
 accountability for performance than on input accounting -- a shift to results-based budgeting.


                    Strategy 6: Expand and strengthen common services

242. The United Nations family of organizations shares many facilities and services a
Headquarters and at other duty stations. The Secretary-General is reviewing all major suppor
services to strengthen existing common services and to expand the provision of services on a


                                                                                                  /...
                                                 -79-




consolidated basis where this can result in more effective and efficient services. The review
includes procurement; information technology and telecommunications; the Integrated
Management Information System (IMIS); personnel services, including medical services;
financial services, including banking, treasury and payroll; legal services; transportation and
traffic operations; security and safety services; facilities management; printing facilities; and
archives and records management.

243. The objective is to assure that support services are cost-effective, high quality and timely,
provided on a competitive basis and result in full client satisfaction. This implies a clear price
structure for common services, a transparent system of budgeting and reimbursement;
accountability to clients for the delivery of services; user feedback mechanisms; harmonization of
regulations, rules, policies and procedures; and economies of scale and selective outsourcing.

      Action 26:

      (a) The quality and cost-effectiveness of current common services will be enhanced
          better to support programmes and programme managers in the United Nations
          and in funds and programmes, by the consolidation as far as possible, by
          January 1998, of Headquarters procurement services, taking into account field
          requirements and specialized procurement expertise, with a view to expanding
          the use of electronic procurement and organization-wide competitive contracts in
          key areas; developing a unified management structure to provide information
          technology and telecommunications infrastructure and services on a cost-effective
          basis; and taking specific steps to enhance the provision of common suppor
          services described above.

      (b) One or more common service facilities will be established at United Nations
          Headquarters in New York, Geneva and Vienna to offer to all United Nations
          organizations certain common services.


                      Strategy 7: Create an “electronic United Nations”

244. On 30 June 1997, the foundation for an electronic United Nations was completed. Every
permanent mission in New York was connected to the Internet, offered training and can now
access the United Nations World Wide Web site and documents on the optical disk system. As
a result, the Daily Journal is available to missions in electronic form before meetings begin,
documents can be transmitted electronically to capitals and a vast amount of information is
literally at the fingertips of the representatives, searchable and retrievable.

245. This simple change shows what is possible thanks to the revolution in information
technology. Advances in information and communications technology can modernize how

                                                                                                    /...
                                               -80-




documents in the United Nations are produced, stored and distributed and offer documents of
higher quality, and at a lower cost, yet reaching a vastly broader audience in every Member
State.

246. Advances in information technology are the basis for increases in the efficiency and
effectiveness of the delivery of both substantive programmes and management of the United
Nations (see annex). The United Nations has achieved a major success in the development of
IMIS, which is being expanded to all United Nations offices away from Headquarters. The
International Labour Organization, UNDP and UNICEF are adopting the IMIS human resources
functionalities. Across the United Nations system, major changes are being made as processes
are modernized and automated.

247. Now, the United Nations is turning more attention to the underlying infrastructure, how i
makes data available to users via the Internet, Intranet and specific reports; and the underlying
systems that support the production, storage and dissemination of parliamentary documents and
other information.

      Action 27:

      (a) The United Nations web site and home page and related sites such as Relief Web
          will be enhanced and electronic postings on the Internet for delegates, Member
          States, non-governmental organizations and the broader public will be
          rationalized and expanded.

      (b) As the United Nations replaces its main documents systems, the internal systems
          that produce, store and disseminate documents, including terminology databases
          and information technology tools to support production, tracking, managemen
          and distribution of documents electronically will be modernized.

      (c) The use of the Intranet to facilitate internal communication and administrative
          simplification and streamlining will be enhanced.

      (d) An information technology strategy for New York Headquarters and offices
          away from Headquarters that assures adequate infrastructure and investment to
          support staff members and services to Member States will be finalized and
          adopted.


                      Strategy 8: Institute an issue management system

248. Many activities that the United Nations system is mandated by various governing bodies to
undertake involve more than one organization with activities and interests in the subject area

                                                                                               /...
                                               -81-




concerned. Coordination of these activities has largely been the responsibility of the
Administrative Committee on Coordination machinery. But with the growing need for a
systemic and integrated approach to development, traditional processes of coordination need to
be supplemented by a series of practical arrangements that provide for more active, cooperative
management of those issues by each of the organizations concerned, both within the United
Nations system and extending to other involved intergovernmental and non-governmental
organizations. There are already useful precedents for arrangements of this kind, as for example,
in the working parties established by the secretariat of the United Nations Conference on
Environment and Development in preparation for the Earth Summit. The approaches developed
by the Administrative Committee on Coordination to promote coordinated follow-up to global
conferences and to implement the System-wide Special Initiative on Africa are also relevant in
this area.

249. These experiences point to the value of establishing for particular situations or issues, of a
working party or task force consisting of each of the principal organizations with an interes
and/or capacity in the area concerned. A lead organization would be selected for each such
activity with separate leaders for sub-activities as may be required. In each case the lead
organization would provide secretariat support for the group. The participants in each such
group would be required to agree: (a) to make information on their respective plans on activities
in the area concerned available on the basis of full transparency to all other participants; (b) to
inform and consult other participants of proposed new initiatives; (c) to contribute to a planning
framework for the area concerned, which will enable the plans and activities of each participan
to be reviewed within the framework of the whole range of activities being carried on by all
participants in the area concerned; (d) to consult with each other with a view to developing an
agreed set of priorities for the area concerned and on the measures through which each
participating organization can best contribute to these priorities and to achieve a more rational
and cost-effective use of their respective capacities and resources.

250. Such groups could be established on an ongoing basis in areas in which it is considered by
the participants to be useful and other cases on an ad hoc basis in respect of issues that require
priority attention within a given period of time but do not necessarily require ongoing
cooperation to the same degree. Issue management groups could be particularly valuable in
areas in which no single United Nations organization or agency has a primary mandate, e.g.,
energy and technology.

      Action 28: The Secretary-General will consult with the Administrative Committee on
      Coordination on ways to introduce systematically issue management methods and
      techniques at the inter-agency level. The Executive Committee for Economic and
      Social Affairs and the United Nations Development Group are being asked to
      contribute to the identification of areas where issue management networks could be
      fruitfully established and to identify appropriate lead agencies.


                                                                                                /...
                                                -82-




                         C. Communications and public information

251. The Task Force on the Reorientation of United Nations Public Information Activities was
set up by the Secretary-General following his 17 March 1997 announcement. It was designed to
provide the basis for reorientation of public information around three principal themes. First,
United Nations information activities will in future be geared to provide communications and
outreach services to Governments, the media, non-governmental organizations and other
re-disseminators, utilizing the latest media technologies and techniques. Second, the information
capability of the Secretariat will be more intimately linked with and directly support all of the
activities of the substantive departments and offices. Third, resources will be decentralized and
refocused to the country and regional levels and greater use made of capabilities. The process of
integrating those United Nations information centres serving developing countries into the
Resident Coordinator offices will be completed.

252. The Task Force has submitted its report to the Secretary-General. The conclusions and
recommendations of the Task Force, some of which are quite far-reaching, will be carefully
considered. The Executive Coordinator for United Nations Reform will review the report of the
Task Force and formulate recommendations for the consideration of the Secretary-General.
Through streamlining and concentration of efforts, overall savings in the proportion of resources
currently devoted to public information activities will be achieved.

253. The Secretary-General strongly supports the principle of consolidation of communications
activities under a senior official and the main thrust of the Task Force report that: (a) in order to
turn the United Nations into an effective modern communications-oriented organization there
must be strong central leadership of a unified communications function by a senior official who
is part of the Secretary-General’s immediate team; and (b) that the United Nations capacity to
communicate at the country level, where the United Nations is already deploying abou
40 per cent of the resources of the Department of Public Information, must be broadened through
imaginative local partnerships with United Nations associations, other non-governmental
organizations and parts of the United Nations system. The very character and purpose of such
partnerships -- increased effectiveness at the national level -- requires that the arrangements be
explored in close cooperation with individual Governments and that the outcome enjoys those
Governments’ full support.

254. The main conclusions of the Task Force are briefly summarized below.

255. The Task Force found that broad and generalized support for the United Nations is only
occasionally translated into any significant level of global public advocacy. Although the United
Nations holds a position of solid respect in public opinion worldwide, it nevertheless seems to be
suffering from an erosion of public support in a number of countries. It is essential that the
Organization have the ability to explain clearly its role and range of activities. In doing so i
should be able to take advantage of a host of technological innovations.

                                                                                                 /...
                                                -83-




256. In such an environment, according to the Task Force, determined minorities suspicious of
the United Nations agenda can have a disproportionate influence on national policy towards the
United Nations. While political setbacks such as those in former Yugoslavia, Somalia and
Rwanda take their toll, more lasting damage is being inflicted worldwide by the perception of the
Organization as a distant, global bureaucracy with little direct relevance to the lives of ordinary
people.

257. This need not be so. Poll after poll, in both industrialized and developing countries,
shows that people’s concerns revolve around issues on the core United Nations agenda: securing
peace, fighting crime, drugs and disease, promoting employment and education, protecting the
environment and human rights. But only rarely is United Nations ownership and relevance to
these issues recognized at the national level.

258. The United Nations worldwide presence and global agenda have the potential to make
people everywhere recognize it as an indispensable global institution. Governments continue to
treat the United Nations as the principal world forum through which to project their national and
regional concerns. In addition, the growing number of activists, public interest groups and other
representatives of strengthened civil societies are keen to be associated with the activities of the
United Nations.

259. While some of the problems about the perception of the Organization can be addressed by
better communications and advocacy work, a more fundamental shift needs to take place in the
manner in which the United Nations conducts its business. There is a crucial need to position
the Organization in a manner that plays to its strengths and reflects its relevance to people’s
daily lives. The United Nations communications priority is therefore evident: putting itself and
its programmes in touch with all the world’s people.

A strategy for communication

260. The Task Force has recommended the following principles to guide a new communications
strategy of the United Nations:

     (a) The communications function should be placed at the heart of the strategic
management of the Organization;

       (b) The United Nations global messages, activities and information must be tailored to a
meaningful local context. This will require more effective central management capacity, a high
degree of delegation to adequately resourced country-level communications programmes and a
significantly strengthened two-way flow of information between the two;




                                                                                                 /...
                                                -84-




      (c) The United Nations is principally a forum for ideas and persuasion. A culture of
communications must therefore pervade the entire Organization, with responsibility borne by all
senior officials, ambassadors, delegates and the larger United Nations family;

       (d) The issues that Member States are committed to must be framed by communications
in terms that have global and regional resonance; abstract principles no longer generate the
passions they previously did. Campaigns should draw in the global United Nations system,
especially since one of the key United Nations priorities is the promotion of sustainable
economic and social development;

      (e) The Secretary-General’s role is central in today’s communication environment, in
which countries and organizations are personified by their chief executives;

      (f) The General Assembly and its Committee on Information should play a more active
role by providing strategic guidance and direction to the communications function, with the
Secretariat given much greater responsibility for determining the methods for implementing
mandated goals;

      (g) There must be flexibility to deploy resources on emerging priorities;

       (h) The image of the United Nations must draw a distinction between two separate
functions that give it stature: as the unique global forum for debate, reflection and ultimate
consensus among Member States; as spokesman, advocate and implementor, through the
Secretary-General, the Secretariat and the entire United Nations system.

Strengthened partnership with Member States

261. The Task Force devoted considerable attention to the role of Member States. A transition
to a new communications structure demands a great deal of cooperation among the differen
actors within the United Nations system. Chief among these are the Member States which, the
Task Force recommends, should be asked to review the whole body of mandates of the
Department of Public Information and establish more effective and simplified rules for handing
down new mandates. The Task Force recommends that no new mandates be established withou
secure sources of funding; all new mandates be time-limited with sunset provisions; there should
be no more than one “year” observance at a time, with a limit to the number of “weeks” and
“months” and “decades” being abolished; and the Committee on Information should consider a
single mandate approach that lays out the priorities and leaves management to determine how
best to deploy its resources to achieve those objectives.

262. The Task Force concluded that the United Nations image must be addressed as a priority.
Towards this end, the United Nations must delineate in its communications the two separate
functions that give it its unique stature. First, it is a unique global forum for debate, reflection

                                                                                                  /...
                                               -85-




and ultimate consensus. Second, through the Secretary-General, the Secretariat and other parts
of the system, it is a spokesman, advocate and implementor of that consensus. An image tha
reflects these two steps -- debate followed by action -- will be much stronger than the blurred
image that the Task Force believes has muddled present public understanding.


            D. United Nations University, research institutes and related bodies

263. In our increasingly interdependent, global civilization, knowledge and its application
through technology, policy analysis, management, marketing, design and communications has
become the primary source of power, added value and competitive advantage. The United
Nations must not limit itself to the knowledge and expertise available within its own family bu
must reach out and tap the knowledge, analyses and expertise of the world’s leading institutions
in each of its fields of activity. This is a primary function of the United Nations University and
other United Nations institutes. The capacity to access, develop and utilize knowledge will be an
absolute prerequisite for the successful functioning of the United Nations in the twenty-firs
century.

264. The United Nations system has over the years developed a considerable capacity for policy
analysis and research carried out by a network of research institutes and similar bodies. Such
bodies are directly linked to the United Nations, in most cases falling under the jurisdiction of
the General Assembly or the Economic and Social Council. These institutes vary considerably in
terms of their mandates, funding modalities and governing structures. The largest, and bes
known, is the United Nations University.

265. Broadly speaking, these bodies can be placed in three different categories: those engaged
in policy research, those that concentrate on basic research and those whose primary
preoccupation is capacity-building, in terms of training and different types of technical
assistance. The activities of some of the bodies fall into more than one of these categories.

266. The problems of proliferation and fragmentation of effort that characterize United Nations
activities in a number of areas are also evident in this sector. The primary mode of funding for
the research institutes is voluntary contributions from Member States and other sources. A
number of the research institutes face severe financial problems and consequently find it difficul
to maintain a consistent output. The quality of the research and other activities thus varies
considerably. Indeed the long-term viability of some of the institutes is in question.

267. In spite of the useful research findings of some of the institutes and the valuable capacity-
building projects of others, the overall contribution and potential of the research institutes
remains largely underutilized by the United Nations community. The research institutes tend to
exist in a world of their own, largely removed from the work and concerns of the United
Nations. The need for such bodies to pursue their research and other activities with a degree of

                                                                                                /...
                                                -86-




autonomy and intellectual rigour partly explains this remoteness. But at the same time, it mus
be underlined that, as parts of the United Nations family, these institutes are not equivalent to
academic or non-governmental research institutions. The United Nations institutes have an
obligation to make their work both relevant and accessible to the larger United Nations
community. And the capacity to establish close links with and draw upon the capacities of other
leading knowledge-related institutions has still been inadequately developed.

268. In the next century, the role of scientific knowledge and policy analysis, including social
science, in guiding and informing decisions made by Member States in intergovernmental bodies
will assume increasing importance. The capacities of the United Nations institutes represent an
important potential resource for the United Nations in this regard. Steps must be taken to ensure
that the United Nations receives the full benefit of the work carried out by its research institutes
and that they access and benefit from the work of other leading institutions.

269. In view of the current problems of viability confronting some of the research institutes and
the need to ensure that overlap and duplication of effort do not affect the quality and quantity of
output of the research institutes, it would be useful and timely to carry out a comprehensive
review of the functioning of the research institutes to determine where consolidation might be
warranted.

270. Another characteristic of the research institutes is that they have little or no contact with
one another. There is consequently no mechanism to identify significant overlap in work
programmes and, equally important, no opportunity to exploit complementarities and identify
areas of potential conflict or inconsistency.

271. It is also necessary to devise ongoing mechanisms and procedures that would engender
more systematic and regular contact between the research institutes and the United Nations
Secretariat. The Strategic Planning Unit in the Office of the Secretary-General will serve as the
principal liaison with the research institutes, providing them with suggestions for research topics
and constituting one of the primary consumers of relevant research topics.

      Action 29:

      (a) The Secretary-General will initiate, in consultation with the United Nations
          University and other research institutes, measures for coordinating and
          rationalizing their respective activities of these institutes and ensuring that they
          contribute more fully and effectively to the policies, programmes and priorities of
          the United Nations. This will include recommendations that might be made to
          Member States to improve governance arrangements in respect of these
          institutes. It could also include amendments to the Charter of the United
          Nations University in accordance with the procedures described in the Charter of
          the University.

                                                                                                     /...
                                                -87-




      (b) The United Nations Staff College will be requested, in preparing programmes for
          international civil servants throughout the United Nations system, to make full
          use of the research and capacity-building experience of the research institutes.


                       VII. PREPARED FOR A CHANGING WORLD

272. The purpose of reforming the United Nations is to strengthen an indispensable institution
and to prepare it to meet the challenges of the future. Reform is not intrinsically an exercise in
cutting costs or reducing staff. It is an exercise to assure the Organization’s relevance in a
changing world and to make sure that those mandates that are given to it by its 185 Member
States are performed effectively and efficiently within the resources that are appropriated for
those ends.

273. The present report presents a blueprint for the future. It describes the challenges the
United Nations faces and the steps that the Secretary-General is taking to meet them and i
proposes a partnership with Member States to go further. The report covers the major strategic
areas and functions of the Organization and sets out, in each area, an agenda for reform. There
are common themes throughout the report which, together, paint a picture of a new and
transformed Organization: one with enhanced leadership and management capabilities; with a
streamlined structure; an Organization that acts as one United Nations at the country level; an
Organization that is better prepared for humanitarian and political crises; an Organization with
highly skilled staff; an Organization with a stronger role in development cooperation; and an
Organization that is better managed and capable of reducing its costs to deliver a “dividend for
development”. The major steps that the Secretary-General is now taking and recommending are
summarized below.

274. Enhanced leadership and strategic management in the United Nations: As a result of
these actions and recommendations, the Secretariat will have a leadership structure and work
programme with four main sectors reflecting the Organization’s primary strategic areas: peace
and security; economic and social affairs; development cooperation; humanitarian affairs, with
human rights as a cross-cutting issue. The Senior Management Group and the executive
committees for each sector will promote greater coherence among the United Nations
departments, programmes and funds and provide a framework for reform. The proposed
appointment of a Deputy Secretary-General will enhance the ability of the Secretary-General to
manage such challenges as cross-functional sectors and complex emergencies. The
recommendation that the General Assembly might periodically adopt a focus for its work is
aimed at enhancing its role in setting strategic directions and priorities for the United Nations.

275. Streamlined structure for greater effectiveness: The Secretariat now has a single,
consolidated Department of Economic and Social Affairs and a single Department of General
Assembly Affairs and Conference Services that consolidates the work previously done by three

                                                                                                /...
                                               -88-




different entities. The Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights and the Centre for
Human Rights will be consolidated into a single Office of the High Commissioner. The
Department of Humanitarian Affairs will be replaced by an Office of the Emergency Relief
Coordinator, its operational functions transferred to other organizations and the role of the
Emergency Relief Coordinator strengthened to ensure effective emergency response and
advocacy of humanitarian issues. A Department for Disarmament and Arms Regulation will
integrate United Nations activities addressing the proliferation of all types of weapon, with a new
emphasis on controlling the flow of conventional weapons to areas of conflict. Further focus is
possible with the approval of Member States, which are requested in the report to consider
consolidating some of the subsidiary bodies of the Economic and Social Council and to review
the role of the regional commissions vis-à-vis other regional and subregional intergovernmental
bodies. A Special Commission to examine possible needs for changes in the Charter of the
United Nations and in the treaties from which the specialized agencies derive their mandates
would help to prepare the United Nations system to meet the challenges of the next century.

276. Strengthened staff: A fundamental review and programme of actions will strengthen
human resources management. As part of these actions and recommendations, a Code of
Conduct for United Nations staff has been developed and, with the approval of the General
Assembly, will become an integral part of the Staff Regulations and Rules. A training and
redeployment programme will be launched for staff who may be affected by reform measures.
Member States are being asked to review the International Civil Service Commission to
strengthen it as a truly independent group of technical experts on salaries, allowances,
compensation and conditions of service, with representation from all regions.

277. Increased preparedness: As a result of these actions and recommendations, the
Secretariat will be able to mount more rapid responses to humanitarian emergencies.
Mechanisms such as the pre-positioning of food stocks; standby service packages; and a global
supply chain will speed up the Organization’s response to emergencies. The Organization’s
ability to predict potential disasters will be improved through a strengthened humanitarian early
warning system and sector-specific early warning systems in UNICEF, the Food and Agricultural
Organization of the United Nations (FAO) and WFP.

278. With Member States’ support, more reliable and predictable arrangements will be
developed for the commitment and rapid despatch of troops and equipment, as well as funding
arrangements for rapidly deployable military/civilian mission headquarters to get peacekeeping
operations off the ground efficiently and effectively from the outset. A time-frame is proposed
for concluding the status-of-forces agreement when a peacekeeping operation is established, and
the model agreement will apply provisionally if agreement is not concluded within that time.

279. One United Nations at country level: As a result of these actions and recommendations,
UNDP, UNICEF, UNFPA and other entities will work in a more unified, cooperative and
coherent framework on the country level. A United Nations Development Assistance Framework

                                                                                                /...
                                               -89-




will set common objectives and time frames for programmes of assistance at the country level,
with pilots in 1997 and 1998. United Nations information centres will be integrated into the
offices of the Resident Coordinators. The number of countries where the organizations share
common premises will more than double in six years. Common premises at the country level
will be designated “UN House” with the first such designation effective immediately in South
Africa. Member State oversight of funds and programmes would be enhanced, for example, by
convening joint committees and consecutive meetings of the executive boards of the
UNDP/UNFPA and UNICEF.

280. Increased managerial effectiveness and efficiency: The proposed 1998-1999 budget will
realize a negative rate of growth. Secretariat posts will decrease by 1,000. Administrative and
other overhead costs in the regular budget will be reduced by one third, and the resulting
dividend will be reallocated to development. Four hundred efficiency projects will be completed
by December 1997. The Secretariat’s rules and central administration will be streamlined and
authority and responsibility delegated to line managers. Information technology,
telecommunications, procurement and other support services will be more cost-effective and
provide more client satisfaction, with one or more common service facility established. An
increasingly “electronic United Nations” will give missions, non-governmental organizations and
the public in all countries access to United Nations documents, publications and other
information. With Member States’ approval, the United Nations planning, budgeting and
performance reporting systems will shift from input accounting to accounting for results with
objectives specified by the General Assembly and greater flexibility and responsibility given to
the Secretary-General for achieving them most effectively within the relevant budgetary
constraints. And a proposed Revolving Credit Fund of up to $1 billion would assist in restoring
liquidity.

281. Shifting resources to development: With the approval of Member States, an economic
and social development account will be established, funded from the dividend resulting from
administrative and other overhead cost savings, and from reducing non-essential meetings and
documents. This “dividend for development” would grow to at least $200 million for the
biennium starting 2002 and the account would be established with a down payment from savings
achieved in the 1996-1997 regular budget.

282. Prepared for a changing world: As a result of these actions and recommendations, the
United Nations will have a strengthened capacity to meet such new and emerging challenges as
combating crime, drugs and terrorism. Post-conflict peace-building will be reinforced. All
entities of the United Nations will designate liaisons to strengthen links with non-governmental
organizations and seek new ways to engage the private sector in the achievement of its
objectives. A new United Nations communications strategy will put the Organization and its
programmes in touch with all the world’s peoples. With the approval of Member States, the
Trusteeship Council will become a forum through which they can exercise their collective
trusteeship for the integrity of the global environment and common areas such as the oceans,

                                                                                               /...
                                               -90-




atmosphere, and outer space. A stronger Economic and Social Council will give new impetus to
development activities.

283. In an Organization as large and complex as the United Nations, reform necessarily consists
not of one or two simple actions but a multitude of tasks that amount to a major agenda tha
must be pursued over time. But the world will not measure the reform process by the number of
items on the agenda -- by how many more or fewer activities are undertaken, or how many
committees are formed or disbanded. The Organization will be judged, rightly, by the impact all
these efforts have on the poor, the hungry, the sick and the threatened -- the peoples of the world
whom the United Nations exists to serve.




                                                                                                /...
                                                            -91-




                                                           Annex

                               EXAMPLES OF ONGOING MANAGERIAL REFORMS

                                                 PEACE AND SECURITY

Improving analytical capacity: In order to respond better to complex political issues on the ground, the Department of
Political Affairs is developing a comprehensive training programme in peace negotiations, which will be combined with
enhanced field tours for Headquarters-based staff. In order to improve political analysis, new mechanisms are being
developed to harness critical information on situations and facilitate linkages.

Enhancing management capability in the field: Delegation of management responsibility to the field is reducing
duplication, increasing responsiveness and improving staff morale:
      Field administration and logistic support for political offices and electoral assistance missions are being streamlined,
      including a mechanism for the provision of common services.
      A comprehensive Field Mission Logistics System, including asset management and movement control, will be
      installed at Headquarters and 16 field missions. During 1998, transport, engineering and communications logistics
      modules will be completed.
      By 1998, an improved financial management system will eliminate manual processes and improve the quality of
      data, financial planning and budgetary forecasts for peacekeeping operations.
      Delegation for local property survey boards, claims review boards and local committees on contracts has been
      increased, and further financial delegations are planned in 1997.
      Contingent-owned equipment and standard cost manuals and an operational support handbook are now available
      electronically to support field managers without constant reference to Headquarters.

Improving preparedness: The success of peacekeeping operations on the ground can be greatly enhanced if military and
civilian participants are thoroughly prepared in advance. The United Nations is undertaking a variety of activities designed
to improve preparedness, for example:
       The Department of Peacekeeping Operations has conducted seminars in Brazil and Ghana for 26 countries to train
       Member States’ military, civilian and police instructors, who will in turn train potential participants in peacekeeping
       operations.
       Personnel from 12 nations have trained at the United Nations Staff College in a training exercise designed to
       enhance the preparedness of individuals and units participating in peacekeeping operations.
       A peacekeeping exercise in El Salvador helped to train 475 personnel from 11 countries.
       Two mission start-up kits, able to support 100 people for 90 days, are being stocked.

Streamlining support for the field: The provision of the right equipment, in the right place at the right time is critical to
the effectiveness and success of the troops on the ground:
       Standardization of the vehicle fleet and central procurement of repair parts will reduce costs significantly.
       The introduction of charter flights to transport police monitors will save over $1 million in 1997.
       Streamlining the medical supplies system will save $1 to 2 million a year.
       New air support contracts will maximize fleet use, streamline support requirements and produce savings of around
       $800,000 a year.

Improving communications in the field: Information technology is being used to improve and speed up communication
with the field:
      Field missions are now linked to United Nations Headquarters and to each other through VSAT, providing more
      capacity at less cost than commercial telephone lines and allowing low-cost inter-mission dialling.
      A strategic peacekeeping database, building on IMIS, provides management information and produces standardized
      financial and other management reports to field missions. Available to 28 Member States, it will be extended to all
      field missions and all interested Member States over the next two years.
      Managers tracking the oil-for-food programme are using an integrated inspection and management system to oversee
      shipments of food and medicine, developed by staff in the Department of Peacekeeping Operations.
      A procurement management and tracking system, based on Lotus Notes and linked to IMIS, has been developed and
      introduced in Angola, the former Yugoslavia and 12 other missions, with the remainder to be completed this year.


                                                                                                                                 /...
                                                          -92-




                                        ECONOMIC AND SOCIAL AFFAIRS

Managing for results: Economic and social departments are developing improved ways of managing their work
programmes to ensure that they correspond with Member States’ requirements. For example:
      In intensive consultation with Member States, the Economic Commission for Europe streamlined its work
      programme, cut programme elements from 268 to 105 and reduced the subsidiary bodies by half.
      The Economic Commission for Africa (ECA) has worked with Member States to reduce the number of
      subprogrammes and achieve more than $600,000 in savings, while focusing on outputs with a greater impact and
      holding fewer, more goal-oriented meetings.

Reducing the Headquarters overhead: Focusing on priorities and results is leading to a concerted effort to maximize
resources devoted to programme work and reduce the “Headquarters overhead”. For example:
      Rationalizing the three economic and social departments in New York to form the Department of Economic and
      Social Affairs will enhance capacity and reduce some 25 administrative posts.
      ECA is decentralizing activities and redeploying about 25 per cent of its staff to subregional Development Centres,
      located throughout the African continent.
      UNCHS will decentralize operations and establish Habitat offices in Latin America and Asia.

Outsourcing: The drive to reduce costs is paying dividends, in terms of both money and improved performance.
     ECA and the Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean (ECLAC) are planning to outsource some
     of their professional work in order to achieve more flexibility in implementing work programmes and to draw on
     expertise that is not required full-time.
     Other commissions are outsourcing such activities as computer installation and maintenance, security, cleaning,
     electrical technicians and messengers and realizing substantial savings.

Information technology is speeding up and improving the quality of substantive information and services:
     The Department of Economic and Social Affairs’ United Nations-wide web site is linked to national official web
     sites, and gives delegates easy access to economic and social information and documents.
     ECLAC is effectively creating an electronic office, linking staff across Latin America and the Caribbean by
     electronic mail; providing an electronic filing system, and realizing significant savings in staff and money. ECLAC
     is also cooperating with the United Nations Office at Vienna to do translation on a remote basis, saving staff and
     travel costs, and making better use of translation services in both locations.
     ECA is computerizing its library, has installed a web site and is developing a local area network. ECA has
     estimated $87,000 in savings on the use of facsimile, telex and telephone and achieved more impact-making
     economic and social information available.
     UNCTAD improved conference servicing using on-line registration, on-line group drafting and retrieval of General
     Assembly and UNCTAD resolutions, resulting in shorter meetings and better service to participants.
     UNCHS has improved the service to Member States, providing documents faster by electronic mail and posting
     official documents on the UNCHS web site.
     Software used by countries to facilitate drug control reporting has been successfully outsourced to an external
     provider by UNDCP.
     UNDCP has shifted to electronic distribution of documents, providing Commission on Narcotic Drugs, technical
     information papers and other documents entirely via Internet.

Increasing delegation and accountability: Basic to management reform is the concept that performance improves when
people closest to the work have managerial authority and responsibility, together with accountability. ECLAC, with
Member States’ support, is preparing a pilot scheme to put this concept into practice, giving managers greater authority
and flexibility with respect to human and financial resources, while making them accountable for achieving specific targets
for the content, quality and volume of outputs.

Good environmental housekeeping: This concept is being promoted within the United Nations. For example, UNEP has
expanded environment-friendly and cost-saving measures, including recycling half of the water used in the Nairobi
compound, using timers on corridor lights, recycling paper and establishing an ozone phase-out programme.



                                                                                                                            /...
                                                        -93-




                              THE UNITED NATIONS DEVELOPMENT GROUP

Shifting staff and authority to country level: The focus of development organizations is their country
programmes, and a major shift is now taking place to give country offices more authority and responsibility:
      UNDP has delegated to its resident representatives full programming authority within approved country
      cooperation frameworks, has reduced headquarters staff by 31 per cent and is redeploying an additional
      25 per cent of headquarters Professionals to country offices.
      UNICEF country representatives are now fully responsible for managing and delivering their country
      programmes, and have authority for preparing and disbursing the annual programme budget within a
      framework set by the Executive Board; UNICEF headquarters role is shifting from oversight and control to
      leadership and global strategy, resulting in a streamlining of headquarters divisions from 19 to 15 and a
      reduction in headquarters staff.
      The United Nations Office for Project Services has deployed 25 per cent of its staff away from its New York
      headquarters in order to place them closer to their clients and has extensively delegated management authority
      to integrated client-based teams, each led by a single manager.
      UNFPA representatives in 14 countries have full decentralized approval authority, while representatives in all
      other countries have approval authority of $750,000 for country projects, up from $500,000 in 1993.

Streamlining work processes: Delivering programmes more effectively on the ground is the prime aim of the
development organizations of the United Nations. This means continually searching for ways to improve
productivity and streamline administrative processes:
     The re-engineering of UNICEF’s Copenhagen warehouse has reduced supply costs, cut cycle times and
     reduced inventory costs from $35 million to $22 million, while improving warehouse output and inventory
     levels. Staff costs have been reduced by $1.4 million.
     UNDP is moving to an ex post accountability framework to shift oversight away from control of inputs to
     assessment of results and impact. UNDP is simplifying manuals and procedures to be more responsive to
     country needs.
     Fully self-financing, the United Nations Office for Project Services services clients who are free to choose
     other suppliers and has introduced business planning for significant improvements in performance and
     processes. For example, procurement turnaround time is now five days, a reduction of more than 50 per cent.
     The Office has placed client needs at the centre of its management culture. Listening to clients and
     developing approaches that respond to their needs has helped to reinforce a subtle but strong service
     orientation among staff and contributed to a shift in organizational culture.
     UNFPA established, in 1996, the Office of Oversight and Evaluation, an independent organizational unit tha
     monitors the results and products of various oversight functions, including audits, policy application reviews
     and evaluations, as well as an internal review exercise with a view to optimizing existing human resources and
     adjusting staff structures to new and emerging priorities.

Improving coordination: A coherent, consistent United Nations presence at the country level requires all the
players to find better ways of working together to serve their clients better:
      UNDP, UNICEF and UNFPA have harmonized their budget presentation;
      The programming cycles of the Joint Consultative Group on Programming have been harmonized in 27
      countries, with 45 more countries pledged to harmonize by 1999;
      Common premises have been established with 3 or more United Nations development agencies in 35 countries
      and will be extended to 65 countries within 6 years. The ultimate goal is for all 4 development entities --
      UNDP, WFP, UNICEF and UNFPA -- to operate from shared premises.




                                                                                                                       /...
                                                         -94-




                                            HUMANITARIAN AFFAIRS

Shifting staff and authority to the field: In acute humanitarian crises, the quickest, most effective response is
rapid action by highly skilled staff on the ground who make most of the decisions, backed up by a headquarters tha
understands their needs, can provide support in mobilizing the resources to meet them and interact with other actors
(political, peacekeeping, human rights, development) to ensure a coherent approach to crises. The Emergency Relief
Coordinator, with the support of and in full consultation with members of the Inter-Agency Steering Committee, will
implement a unitary system for the coordination of humanitarian assistance on the basis of the resident coordinator
system. This would allow the rapid establishment of a coordination capacity in situ to provide a timely and coheren
system-wide response.

Shifting staff to the field: A fundamental shift of United Nations humanitarian staff, resources and decision-
making power to the field is now under way. This involves:
      Delegating authority and responsibility to managers in the field;
      Streamlining and eliminating many processes and procedures to make field operations more flexible and
      responsive;
      An expanded role for field offices in analysis, strategic planning, decision-making and the management of
      emergency responses;
      A new structure and culture for Headquarters, whose central role will now be to support the field and mobilize
      resources.

Human resources and career development: To support field coordination better, United Nations humanitarian
organizations are making major changes in how they manage human resources, including:
     Requiring staff to serve frequent tours in the field, where they exercise significant responsibility;
     Introducing systematic performance appraisals, career management systems and frequent on-the-job training to
     help field staff to think more strategically, take greater responsibility, manage teams and stand accountable for
     allocating resources and achieving results;
     Field experience is to become an important criterion for senior appointments;
     UNHCR has initiated project “Delphi” to re-engineer management, including human resource management,
     fundamentally.

Strengthening rapid response mechanisms: The effectiveness of field staff depends on having material, services
and information available quickly at the point of crisis. Rapid response mechanisms, such as the regional
pre-positioning of foodstocks are already in place and more are being developed, including:
      A global supply chain;
      Standby service packages;
      United Nations disaster assessment, and coordination teams;
      Access to Member States’ civil defence, military and other assets.
More innovations in areas such as warehousing emergency stocks, transport, logistics and emergency
telecommunications would, almost certainly, pay handsome dividends. There may well be instances in which cos
savings and increased efficiency could result through clear assignment of operational responsibility for specific sector
or target group-related functions for the entire United Nations humanitarian community.

Humanitarian early warning: Humanitarian disasters can be better mitigated, if not prevented, by effective early
warning. The United Nations is significantly increasing its capacity to predict potential disasters through:
      Sector-specific early warning systems in UNICEF, FAO and WFP;
      A United Nations-wide humanitarian early warning system (HEWS) as well as ReliefWeb and interregional
      information networks.
These systems must be strengthened and made mutually compatible and interoperable, so that systematic monitoring
of political, economic, social, human rights and environmental indicators can, singly or together, give warning of a
potential humanitarian crisis.



                                                                                                                         /...
                                                          -95-




                                                SUPPORT SERVICES

More cost-effective meeting services:
     Remote translation is now used broadly by United Nations offices in New York, Santiago, Vienna and others to
     reduce travel costs and make better use of translation staff.
     Off-site verbatim reporting is being tested and planned for expansion during the fifty-second session of the General
     Assembly with substantial savings in travel and other costs.
     Expanded use is being made of local temporary staff to reduce cost of language services.
     Videoconferencing as a tool for remote interpretation is being evaluated on a pilot basis in Vienna.
     A standard package of information technology equipment is being installed in all conference rooms at headquarters
     in 1997.

Creating an “electronic United Nations”:
     All permanent missions in New York have been connected to the Internet and thus to United Nations documents via
     the web site and the optical disk system, by 30 June 1997. Work stations have been installed in the Delegates’
     Lounge.
     The web site has been enhanced to include information on peace and security, international law, environment, the
     Cyber School Bus and UN-I-QUE, a ready-reference file of the Dag Hammarskjöld Library.
     4,200 users and all servers at Headquarters have been supplied with standardized software via a centrally managed
     system, cutting down on distribution costs and reducing trouble calls.
     Transition from cable and telex to electronic mail and facsimile under way at headquarters, to be completed in 1998.
     Documentation is being reduced through a variety of steps, including voluntary reductions by Permanent Missions
     because of its availability in electronic form, shorter documents and cleaning of distribution lists. The projected
     decline in document production at New York Headquarters is 3,975,000 pounds of paper in 1997, down from
     5,862,000 pounds in 1995, a 30 per cent decline.

Outsourcing:
     The United Nations Office at Vienna is outsourcing purchase and administration of office supplies, mailroom
     operations and some translation, editorial design and composition, as well as restructuring some contracts, for
     example saving $300,000 by restructuring the cleaning contract alone.
     Maintenance services, computer maintenance, architectural and engineering functions are being outsourced at the
     United Nations Office at Geneva.

Simplification of processes and procedures:
     Electronic funds transfer in Geneva has reduced number of cheques issued by at least 33 per cent, and, together with
     other steps, is reducing processing time and saving more than $350,000.
     Streamlined purchase of medical supplies with a blanket purchase order has eliminated delays in the purchase of
     emergency medical supplies and is now being applied to the purchase of vaccines and other items.
     Streamlined submissions to the appointment and promotion bodies have already reduced paper by 25 per cent, with
     additional improvements anticipated.

Achieving greater efficiency and effectiveness:
     Consolidation of New York’s mainframe operations at the International Computing Centre in Geneva, saving an
     estimated $1.2 million per year, completed April 1997.
     Business plan prepared for United Nations Postal Administration to expand sales of stamps, reduce costs and expand
     awareness and support for United Nations programmes and issues. Counter sales in New York up 50 per cen
     compared to 1996.
     Energy-saving measures in New York Headquarters adjusting temperatures, using more energy-efficient equipmen
     and alternate lighting is saving at least $150,000 in 1997.
     Automation of security systems in Geneva is saving $1,197,000 in staff costs in the current biennium as well as
     overtime and other costs.
     Communications costs are being reduced by $400,000 in the United Nations Office at Vienna.
     Quality assurance and client consultation guidelines are being developed by the Office of Internal Oversigh
     Services.
-96-




-----




        /...
