               United Nations                                                                                                              A/74/6 (Sect. 27)*
               General Assembly                                                                                   Distr.: General
                                                                                                                  17 April 2019
                                                                                                                  Original: English




Seventy-fourth session
Items 137 and 138 of the preliminary list**
Proposed programme budget for 2020
Programme planning


               Proposed programme budget for 2020
               Part VI
               Human rights and humanitarian affairs

               Section 27
               Humanitarian assistance
               Programme 23
               Humanitarian assistance


Contents
                                                                                                                                                                    Page

               Foreword . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     3
               Overall orientation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .          4
               A.     Proposed programme plan for 2020 and programme performance for 2018*** . . . . . . . .                                                          8
               B.     Proposed post and non-post resource requirements for 2020**** . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .                                            25
                      Annexes
                       I.     Organizational structure and post distribution for 2020 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .                                  41
                      II.     Summary of proposed changes in established posts by component and
                              subprogramme . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .         42




            * Third reissue for technical reasons (18 June 2019).
           ** A/74/50.
          *** In keeping with paragraph 11 of resolution 72/266 A, the part consisting of the programme plan
              and programme performance information is submitted through the Committee for Programme
              and Coordination for the consideration of the General Assembly.
         **** In keeping with paragraph 11 of resolution 72/266 A, the part consisting of the post and
              non-post resource requirements is submitted through the Advisory Committee on
              Administrative and Budgetary Questions for the consideration of the General Assembly.
 19-03801* (E)      180619
 *1903801*
Foreword
      In 2019, nearly 132 million people will need humanitarian assistance and protection, the majority because of
the impact of conflict. Most of those crises are fuelled by protracted conflict, compounded by underdevelopment,
fragile institutions and environmental degradation linked to climate change.
      International and local humanitarian actors have achieved progress in recent years: humanitarian
organizations are able to reach tens of millions of vulnerable people every year, saving millions of lives.
International humanitarian response is now better coordinated and based on more comprehensive and accurate
assessments of needs and draws on new technological advances, tools and services that have improved operational
planning, implementation and monitoring of humanitarian action. Humanitarian responses now rely increasingly
on early warning and early action approaches and draw more systematically from lessons learned from past
experiences.
     Facing record humanitarian needs in 2018, the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs helped
mobilize the highest-ever funding of more than $15 billion, against a requirement of $25 billion, as set out in the
Global Humanitarian Overview 2018.
     However, humanitarian aid cannot replace long-term political and development solutions that people in crises
so desperately hope for. That is why we are working to mobilize the will, skills and creativity of the global
community to end crises and promote development to help people become more resilient to disasters that cannot
be avoided.
     In 2020, the implementation of the Secretary-General’s vision for reforming the United Nations offers a
unique opportunity to continue to increase the effectiveness of the Organization and make it even more fit to help
reduce some of the underlying drivers of humanitarian crises.
     Finally, given today’s protracted and complex crises, we must go beyond meeting humanitarian needs to
reduce the impact of disaster and end need through greater collaboration with development partners. We have a
unique opportunity to reduce human suffering.

                                                                                        (Signed) Mark Lowcock
                                                                Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs
                                                                              and Emergency Relief Coordinator




 3/42                                                                                                      19-03801
Part VI          Human rights and humanitarian affairs

                 Overall orientation
                 Mandates and background

          27.1   The Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs is responsible for ensuring the timely,
                 coherent, coordinated and principled response of the international community to disasters and
                 emergencies and for facilitating the transition from emergency relief to rehabilitation and sustainable
                 development.
          27.2   The mandate of the Office derives from the priorities established in relevant General Assembly
                 resolutions, including resolution 46/182, in which the Assembly set out the guiding principles of
                 humanitarian response and reinforced earlier decisions and resolutions adopted by it and by the
                 Economic and Social Council concerning humanitarian assistance and the leadership role of the
                 Secretary-General to ensure better preparation for, as well as a coor dinated, rapid and coherent
                 response to, natural disasters and other emergencies. To that end, the resolution also established the
                 role of the Emergency Relief Coordinator, who works with the Secretary -General and the
                 Inter-Agency Standing Committee in leading, coordinating and facilitating humanitarian assistance.
                 The mandate has been confirmed and consolidated through the normative developments of the
                 resolution over the past 25 years.
          27.3   The United Nations Office for Disaster Risk Reduction, which is the focal point in the United Nations
                 system for the coordination of disaster risk reduction, is responsible for leading and ensuring
                 synergies among the disaster reduction activities of the United Nations system and regional
                 organizations and activities in socioeconomic and humanitarian fields. It provides a data -driven,
                 people-centric approach to supporting Governments and stakeholders to identify and report against
                 relevant ongoing and emerging disaster risks.
          27.4   The mandate of the United Nations Office for Disaster Risk Reduction derives from the priorities
                 established in relevant resolutions of the General Assembly, most notably 56/195, as well as the
                 Sendai Declaration and the Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction. Today, 1 in 60 people
                 around the world is caught up in a crisis and urgently needs humanitarian assistance. Furthermore,
                 natural disasters and the effects of climate change continue to generate humanitarian needs, affecting
                 350 million people on average each year. Although there has been progress in predicting and
                 preparing for disasters, and humanitarian organizations are increasingly successful in saving lives,
                 many needs still remain unmet.


                 Alignment with the Charter of the United Nations, the Sustainable
                 Development Goals and other transformational agendas

          27.5   The mandates of the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs guide the subprogrammes
                 in producing their respective deliverables, which contribute to the attainment of each
                 subprogramme’s objective. The objectives of the subprogrammes are aligned with the Organization ’s
                 purpose to achieve international cooperation in solving international problems of an economic,
                 social, cultural or humanitarian character and in promoting and encouraging respect for human rights
                 and for fundamental freedoms for all without distinction as to race, sex, language or religion, as
                 stipulated in Article 1 of the Charter of the United Nations. In the context of the 2030 Agenda for
                 Sustainable Development, the purposes stipulated in Article 1 of the Charter are embodied by the
                 Sustainable Development Goals. Figure 27.I below summarizes the specific Sustainable
                 Development Goals with which the objectives, and therefore the deliverabl es, of the respective
                 subprogrammes are aligned.




4/42                                                                                                             19-03801
Section 27        Humanitarian assistance

                  Figure 27.I
                  Humanitarian assistance: alignment of subprogrammes with Sustainable
                  Development Goals




           27.6   The objectives of the subprogrammes are also aligned with further global initiatives and change
                  agendas, such as the Paris Agreement and the Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction.


                  Recent developments

           27.7   In 2018, humanitarian organizations were increasingly successful in saving lives and reducing
                  suffering, and global funding levels for humanitarian action reached a record high. Despite
                  significant progress, humanitarian needs remain high and outpace funding levels. Crises affect more
                  people and for longer, and the number of people targeted to receive assistance through United
                  Nations-led humanitarian response plans increased in 2018 from 77 million in 2014 to 101 million.
           27.8   Investments in disaster risk reduction have led to a decrease in disaster-related fatalities. Despite
                  that success, however, climate change and a variety of other risk drivers have resulted in an increase
                  in human and economic losses every year. Between 1998 and 2017, climate -related and geophysical
                  disasters were responsible for the deaths of 1.3 million people and left a further 4.4 billion injured,
                  homeless, displaced or in need of emergency assistance. During that same period, disaster -hit
                  countries reported direct economic losses valued at $2,908 billion, of which climate-related disasters
                  caused $2,245 billion (77 per cent of the total). Such losses are only part of the story. The World
                  Bank has calculated that the real cost to the global economy is a staggering $520 billion per annum,
                  with disasters pushing 26 million people into poverty every year.




19-03801                                                                                                             5/42
Part VI          Human rights and humanitarian affairs

                 Strategy and external factors for 2020

          27.9   The Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs expects to contribute more efficiently and
                 effectively to its planned results for 2020 through a more efficient and field -focused service delivery
                 model. As part of its efforts to strengthen the effective delivery of the mandate, the Office has
                 optimized its management structure to make it more transparent and accountable, streamlined its
                 management processes and achieved greater operational efficiency by decentralizing decision -
                 making and administrative services.
       27.10     The humanitarian system is more effective and impactful than it has ever been, the capacity to
                 identify different groups’ specific needs and vulnerabilities has improved, and response plans are
                 now more inclusive, comprehensive, innovative and prioritized. Despite those successes, needs
                 continue to grow, and the gap between responses and needs is widening. Most needs occur in long -
                 lasting crises. To meet those challenges, the Office will work with partners to mitigate shocks before
                 they become humanitarian emergencies. In a changing world and evolving sector, such responses
                 benefit from strong partnerships, based on mutual respect, trust and confidence. To help realize the
                 commitment of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development to “leave no one behind”, the Office
                 will further improve collaboration between the humanitarian system and the United Nations
                 development system, to reduce suffering and need, in line with mandates, and to promote coherence
                 between humanitarian, development and peace actors.
       27.11     In its work, the Office promotes the timely, coherent, coordinated and principled humanitarian
                 response of the international community to disasters and complex emergencies. Humanitarian crises
                 can impede or reverse development gains made over decades. Humanitarian action and preparedness
                 can help mitigate those impacts, especially on the most vulnerable and the furthest behind, and
                 thereby reinforce achievement of the 2030 Agenda and the Sustainable Development Goals.
                 Humanitarian assistance is provided in ways that can be supportive of recovery and longer-term
                 sustainable development, collaborating closely with the development actors to that end, in
                 accordance with respective mandates. In that way, humanitarian assistance can be suppor tive of the
                 Sustainable Development Goals and longer-term development while fully respecting General
                 Assembly resolution 46/182 and humanitarian principles and taking into account the fact that the
                 Office does not carry out operational activities for development.
       27.12     The impact of disaster risk reduction is twofold: reducing the vulnerability of communities to
                 hazards safeguards development gains while risk-informed development contributes to Member
                 States achieving the Sustainable Development Goals, pivoting from the cycle of disaster -respond-
                 repeat and improving investment in disaster risk reduction and resilience. The United Nations Office
                 for Disaster Risk Reduction will pursue the substantial reduction of disaster risk and losses through
                 the prevention of new and the reduction of existing disaster risk, and by strengthening resilience
                 through multi-hazard disaster risk management. Humanitarian response and development must
                 become risk-informed. Reducing disaster risk and building resilience bridges both the mandate and
                 activity divide between humanitarian response and sustainable development. Reducing disaster risk
                 is therefore at the very heart of efforts to ensure that the United Nations is collabora tive, effective
                 and efficient. The United Nations Office for Disaster Risk Reduction will continue to ensure overall
                 policy coherence by engaging with Member States, contributing to relevant intergovernmental
                 processes, establishing and guiding regional and national coordination mechanisms to accelerate
                 compliance with the Sendai Framework and related Sustainable Development Goal targets, building
                 the capacity of counterparts and leveraging new partnerships and financing models to increase
                 financing for disaster risk reduction and risk-sensitive investment.
       27.13     With regard to the external factors, the overall plan for 2020 is based on the following planning
                 assumptions:
                 (a)   Humanitarian needs and funding requirements will remain high in 2020;
                 (b)   The majority of humanitarian needs will continue to occur in long -lasting crises, which are the
                       product of interactions between natural hazards, armed conflict and human vulnerability and


6/42                                                                                                              19-03801
Section 27     Humanitarian assistance

                     which require complex and even faster responses, closer collaboration between the
                     humanitarian system and development actors.
       27.14   The Office integrates a gender perspective in its operational activities, deliverables and results, as
               appropriate. The Office will work towards the implementation of the United Nation System -wide
               Action Plan on Gender Equality and the Empowerment of Women as a central framework for
               enhancing and accelerating gender mainstreaming. The Office ensures that a gender perspective is
               fully integrated into its activities through its own and inter-agency policies and tools, such as the
               Inter-Agency Standing Committee’s policy on gender equality and the empowerment of women and
               girls in humanitarian action, its Gender Handbook in Humanitarian Action, its gender with age
               marker and its Gender Standby Capacity project roster and advisers.
       27.15   With regard to cooperation with other entities, the Office will continue to work with national and
               local governments, affected communities, Inter-Agency Standing Committee partners and many
               other stakeholders, including regional disaster management and response organizations, other
               regional and subregional organizations, the private sector, first responders and academia.
       27.16   With regard to inter-agency coordination and liaison, the Office will continue, throu gh the
               Inter-Agency Standing Committee and its subsidiary bodies, to coordinate the development of
               guidance for the humanitarian response system. It will provide and manage global platforms, such
               as the United Nations Disaster Assessment and Coordination Team and the International Search and
               Rescue Advisory Group, to pool resources and facilitate a joint response to natural disasters and
               man-made crises. The Office coordinates with and seeks input from the Department of Peace
               Operations, the Department of Political and Peacebuilding Affairs, the Office of the United Nations
               High Commissioner for Human Rights and other relevant agencies ahead of the briefings of the
               informal Security Council Expert Group on the Protection of Civilians, especially when the
               extension of the mandates of political and peacekeeping missions is under consideration. On
               resilience and the selection and capacity-building of humanitarian leaders, the Office collaborates
               closely with the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) and th e Development
               Coordination Office. At the country level, the Office guides United Nations agencies, such as the
               World Food Programme, UNDP, the United Nations Children’s Fund, the Food and Agriculture
               Organization of the United Nations, the World Health Organization and the United Nations
               Population Fund, through the humanitarian programme cycle to ensure coherent and consistent
               system-wide response strategies and minimize the duplication of response efforts.




19-03801                                                                                                         7/42
Part VI        Human rights and humanitarian affairs

          A. Proposed programme plan for 2020 and programme performance
             for 2018
               Programme of work




               Subprogramme 1
               Policy and analysis

          1.   Objective
       27.17   The objective, to which this subprogramme contributes, is to improve the strategic and operational
               coherence of humanitarian response.

          2.   Alignment with the Sustainable Development Goals
       27.18   Given its broad scope, the objective is aligned with all of the Sustainable Development Goals.

          3.   Highlighted result in 2018

Increased attention to conflict-induced food insecurity
In 2018, the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs coordinated and prepared the
report of the Secretary-General on the protection of
civilians in armed conflict. In that report, the
Secretary-General noted that, having declined for
more than two decades, global hunger was on the rise,
with conflict cited as the main reason for that
reversal. The risk of famine and severe food
insecurity was concentrated in a relatively small
number of countries affected by large-scale, severe
and protracted conflict. Nearly two thirds of the
world’s hungry lived in countries in conflict. Nearly
500 million undernourished people – and almost
80 per cent of the world’s 155 million stunted
children – lived in countries affected by conflict. In
the report, the Secretary-General detailed the
response of the United Nations, humanitarian and
development actors to famine in parts of Unity State,
South Sudan, and to the risk of famine in north-east
Nigeria, Somalia, South Sudan and Yemen in 2017.
The Secretary-General described the causes of severe food insecurity in the world and called for respect for
international humanitarian law, as well as greater investment in agriculture and livelihoods to address some of these
causes.




8/42                                                                                                          19-03801
Section 27        Humanitarian assistance

Result and evidence
The deliverables contributed to the result, which is the recognition of an express link between armed conflict and
food insecurity. Evidence of the result includes the adoption of Security Council resolution 2417 (2018), which
marked an important step in the international response to food insecurity.
The result demonstrates progress made in 2018 towards the collective attainment of the objective.


       27.19      A planned result for 2018, which is decisions of Inter-Agency Standing Committee members and
                  other partners are informed by humanitarian policy analysis and dialogue, as referred to in the
                  proposed programme budget for the biennium 2018–2019, was achieved, as evidenced by a greater
                  number of humanitarian policy priorities in the report of the Secretary-General on strengthening
                  coordination that are discussed by Member States in the annual humanitarian resolution negotiations
                  of the Economic and Social Council and the General Assembly. Three high -level panels were held
                  at the 2018 Economic and Social Council humanitarian affairs segment, on the following topics:
                  (a) addressing the challenges, risks and impacts of extreme weather events and climate change on
                  the most vulnerable; (b) addressing the impact of armed conflict on children – strengthening the
                  response to meet children’s needs; and (c) strengthening local capabilities for sustainable outcomes
                  and local resilience – contribution of humanitarian action. In addition, in 2018, the Vice-President
                  of the Economic and Social Council gave a briefing to Member States on the report of the Secretary -
                  General. Several resolution negotiations were held on issues presented in the report, including child
                  protection, protection against sexual exploitation and abuse, gender-based violence and natural
                  disasters.


             4.   Highlighted planned result for 2020

Increased collaboration between humanitarian and development partners at the country -level
In 2018, the Office contributed to making progress on bridging the gap between humanitarian and development
assistance at the global level. At a workshop co-hosted with the World Bank and including UNDP and the
Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development, development and humanitarian donors came together
to discuss how donors could contribute to operationalizing and financing joined -up approaches aimed at reducing
needs, risks and vulnerabilities and increasing the resilience of people affected by crises. In 2018, guidance was
developed on implementing the strategies agreed collaboratively between humanitarian and development partners.
Joined-up approaches were piloted in Burkina Faso, Chad and Mauritania.

Challenge and response
The challenge was that a growing number of people are affected by protracted crises and, to address their needs in
a sustainable manner, it is necessary to ensure a continuum of support through short -term humanitarian action and
medium- to long-term development programming. To achieve this, closer and more systematic collaboration
between humanitarian and development stakeholders is more widely needed, for example, through joined -up
planning for commonly agreed strategies, so that short-term needs are met while vulnerability is reduced and
resilience strengthened in the long term.
In response, for 2020, the Office plans to scale-up efforts for joined-up planning and strategies at the country level.

Result and evidence
The planned deliverable is expected to contribute to the result, which is increased collaboration between humanitarian
and development actors, based on lessons learned from experiences in the various country contexts. Evidence of
the result, if achieved, will include 10 countries where joined -up planning will have led to commonly agreed
strategies, as shown in the figure below. Those joined-up efforts should, wherever possible, reinforce and strengthen
the capacities that already exist at the national and local levels and connect to national and regional str ategies.
The result, if achieved, will demonstrate progress made in 2020 towards the collective attainment of the objective.


19-03801                                                                                                           9/42
Part VI         Human rights and humanitarian affairs

Performance measures: number of countries where humanitarian and development partners have defined
common strategies

 12
 10
  8                                                                                              10

  6                                                             8

  4                     6

  2
  0
                      2018                                     2019                              2020




        27.20   The subprogramme will continue to be guided by all mandates entrusted to it, which provide the
                legislative framework for its deliverables.


           5.   Deliverables for the period 2018–2020

        27.21   The below table lists all deliverables, by category and subcate gory, for the period 2018–2020 that
                contributed and are expected to contribute to the attainment of the objective stated above.

                Table 27.1
                Subprogramme 1: deliverables for the period 2018–2020, by category and subcategory

                                                                                          2018    2018       2019      2020
                                                                                       planned   actual   planned   planned


                Quantified deliverables
                A. Facilitation of the intergovernmental process and expert bodies
                   Parliamentary documentation (number of documents)                        3         3        3          3
                   Substantive services for meetings (number of three-hour meetings)        6         6        6          6
                B. Generation and transfer of knowledge
                   Seminars, workshops and training events (number of days)                 3         3        3          3
                   Technical materials (number of materials)                                2         2        2          2




10/42                                                                                                               19-03801
Section 27        Humanitarian assistance




                  Subprogramme 2
                  Coordination of humanitarian action and emergency response

             1.   Objective

       27.22      The objective, to which this subprogramme contributes, is to ensure a coherent, effective and timely
                  humanitarian response to alleviate human suffering in natural disasters and complex emergencies.


             2.   Alignment with the Sustainable Development Goals

       27.23      Given its broad scope, the objective is aligned with all of the Sustainable Development Goals.


             3.   Highlighted result in 2018

Coordinated international humanitarian response in Yemen
One of the biggest successes for the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs in 2018 was the
coordination of the humanitarian response plan for
today’s severest humanitarian crisis: Yemen. After
nearly four years of conflict in Yemen, as well as
economic decline and institutional collapse, more than
24 million people — including 3.3 million displaced
people — require humanitarian aid. More than
20 million people, representing two thirds of the
population, are food insecure. At the same time, Yemen
continues to grapple with a major outbreak of cholera,
worsening rates of malnutrition and other challenges.
The 2018 Yemen humanitarian response plan required
$2.96 billion to provide life-saving humanitarian
assistance and protection to people across the country.
In order to meet the humanitarian needs identified in t he plan, the Office, in partnership with the Governments of
Sweden and Switzerland, convened a high-level pledging conference on Yemen in Geneva on 3 April 2018. The
Conference succeeded in mobilizing resources and bringing together stakeholders to generat e political will and
action for humanitarian response. Over 350 participants from 64 Member States attended, as well as regional
organizations, United Nations agencies, international non-governmental organizations and Yemeni national
non-governmental organization (NGOs) and the European Commission. A total of $2.01 billion was pledged for
the humanitarian response in Yemen, meeting 85.3 per cent of the requirements, making it the second highest funded
United Nations-led response in 2018.

Result and evidence
The deliverable contributed to the result, which is a targeted and well -coordinated international humanitarian
response for Yemen. Evidence of the result includes the fact that 254 humanitarian partners agreed on priorities and
a coherent strategy to meet the needs of 13 million people.
The result demonstrates progress made in 2018 towards the collective attainment of the objective.


19-03801                                                                                                           11/42
Part VI         Human rights and humanitarian affairs

        27.24   A planned result for 2018, which is the timely and coordinated use of the Central Emergency
                Response Fund in countries with new and protracted emergencies, as referred to in the proposed
                programme budget for the biennium 2018–2019, was partially achieved, as evidenced by the
                improvement from 69 per cent in the biennium 2016–2017 to 83 per cent of project proposals under
                the rapid response window approved by the Emergency Relief Coordinator within three working
                days of their final submission, owing mainly to increased guidance and engagement with requesting
                agencies prior to the submission of proposals and during t he review process.


           4.   Highlighted planned result for 2020

Increased use of humanitarian funding for early action
In 2018, despite improvements to the humanitarian system to make it more efficient, the trend of rising needs posed
a continuous challenge to providing adequate and effective humanitarian assistance to meet the needs of affected
people. Humanitarian crises are increasing in number and in duration. The majority of people targeted (nearly
60 per cent) receive assistance for five years or more. Since 2015, appeals for crises lasting five years or longer
have spiked and now command most funding received and requested (80 per cent). These trends emphasize the
need for closer collaboration between humanitarian and development actors to dec rease vulnerability in the long
term. Humanitarian appeals continue to grow in the face of growing needs. According to the Office ’s 2019 Global
Humanitarian Overview, the most comprehensive, authoritative and evidence -based assessment of global
humanitarian needs, $21.9 billion will be required in 2019 to address the needs of 131.7 million people.

Challenge and response
The challenge was the persisting significant gap between the financial resources required to meet growing
humanitarian needs and the actual resources available, making it necessary for the Office to consider new ways of
maximizing the impact of humanitarian funding.
In response, for 2020, the Office will more effectively plan for future emergencies by developing and strengthening
contingency funding arrangements in order to provide critical resources as early as possible before a crisis escalates
and is costing more lives and causing more human suffering. Many disasters and complex emergencies are
predictable, with early warning signals mounting over many months, as has for example been the case in El Niño/La
Niña phenomena. The drought-prone and chronically food-insecure regions are examples of situations where there
is potential for both early action and response through predictable fundi ng. In addition, the Office acted early in
other contexts to stem humanitarian crises. For example, in the face of the Ebola virus in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, funding from the Central Emergency Response Fund was deployed to reinforce systems i n
neighbouring countries and prevent the threat of a humanitarian emergency spreading there.
By 2020, the Office will build on its experience utilizing the Central Emergency Response Fund for early action.
In May 2018, for example, when early forecasts of a drought and food crisis emerged in the Sahel, the Fund
allocated $30 million to help agencies initiate a swift response in Burkina Faso, Chad, Mali and Mauritania. Tying
that kind of funding to pre-agreed triggers and implementation plans can go a long way to improving programme
design and impact, cutting response times and costs and reducing suffering.

Result and evidence
The planned deliverable is expected to contribute to the result, which is the availability of contingency funding to
humanitarian partners, based on forecasts and risk assessments to mitigate the humanitarian impact of the hazard.
Evidence of the result, if achieved, will include a formalized Central Emergency Response Fund early action
approach.
The result, if achieved, will demonstrate progress made in 2020 towards the collective attainment of the objective.




12/42                                                                                                          19-03801
Section 27        Humanitarian assistance

Performance measures

2018                                          2019                                       2020


                                                                                         Central Emergency Response Fund
                                                                                         early action approach is formalized
                                              Expansion of the pilots and
                                              development of a methodology for
Central Emergency Response Fund               a Central Emergency Response
early action approach is piloted              Fund early action approach



       27.25      The subprogramme will continue to be guided by all mandates entrusted to it, which provide the
                  legislative framework for its deliverables.


             5.   Deliverables for the period 2018–2020

       27.26      The below table lists all deliverables, by category and subcategory, for the period 2018–2020 that
                  contributed and are expected to contribute to the attainment of the objective stated above.

                  Table 27.2
                  Subprogramme 2: deliverables for the period 2018–2020, by category and subcategory

                                                                                               2018    2018       2019      2020
                                                                                            planned   actual   planned   planned


                  Quantified deliverables
                  A. Facilitation of the intergovernmental process and expert bodies
                     Parliamentary documentation (number of documents)                           1       13         1          1
                     Substantive services for meetings (number of three-hour meetings)           2        2         2          2
                  B. Generation and transfer of knowledge
                     Seminars, workshops and training events (number of days)                    2        2         2          2
                  Non-quantified deliverables
                  C. Substantive deliverables
                     Consultation, advice and advocacy
                     Humanitarian assistance missions
                     Databases and substantive digital materials
                  Direct service delivery
                  D. Communication deliverables
                     Outreach programmes, special events and information materials
                  E. Enabling deliverables
                     Administration



             6.   Most significant relative variances of deliverables

                  Variances between the actual and planned figures in 2018
       27.27      The variance in parliamentary documentation is driven mainly by the preparation by the Office of
                  12 reports of the Secretary-General, owing to the requirements of the implementation of Security
                  Council resolutions 2139 (2014), 2165 (2014), 2191 (2014), 2258 (2015), 2332 (2016), 2393 (2017)
                  and 2401 (2018), concerning the situation in the Syrian Arab Republic.

19-03801                                                                                                                  13/42
Part VI         Human rights and humanitarian affairs




                Subprogramme 3
                Natural disaster risk reduction

           1.   Objective

        27.28   The objective, to which this subprogramme contributes, is to prevent and reduce the risk of and
                vulnerability to natural hazards and the impact of disasters.


           2.   Alignment with the Sustainable Development Goals

        27.29   Given its broad scope, the objective is aligned with all of the Sustainable Development Goals.


           3.   Highlighted result in 2018

Sendai Framework monitoring process takes off
In March 2018, the United Nations Office for Disaster
Risk Reduction launched the Sendai Framework monitor,
the global online tool to monitor the implementation of
the Sendai Framework. The monitor is a dual reporting
system that allows countries to report on progress not
only on the seven global targets of the Sendai
Framework, but also on the 11 indicators associated with
Sustainable Development Goals 1, 11 and 13.
Furthermore, monitoring progress towards targets and
related indicators of the Sendai Framework will also
provide countries with the information they need to
monitor climate change impacts and adaptation efforts.
This is the first time that the international community
will be able to review global progress in disaster risk
reduction in a systematic way linked to overall progress
in sustainable development. The Office is the central
facilitator and clearing house for this process.

Result and evidence
The deliverables contributed to the result, which is the reinforced ability of Governments and experts to input data
and report on the Sendai Framework indicators, thereby enabling Member States and the global community to track
progress, enhance knowledge and improve evidence-based decision-making in preventing new and reducing
existing risks and in strengthening the resilience of communities and countries, while promoting accountability,
which is also a cornerstone of the Sendai Framework.
Evidence of the result includes the fact that, by end of 2018, 87 countries were reporting data using the Sendai
Framework monitor. In March 2018, government representatives and experts from Armenia, Azerbaijan,
Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Tajikistan and Uzbekistan came together, along with officials from international
organizations, to undergo training on the use of the Sendai Framework monitor. Speaking at the event, Johannes
Stenbaek Madsen, representing the European External Action Service of the European Union Delegatio n in Astana,
said “What I learned at the workshop convinced me that all the involved development partners will be able to deal


14/42                                                                                                        19-03801
Section 27        Humanitarian assistance

much more effectively with disaster preparedness in the future. I consider it a real paradigm shift that we will now
focus on and measure the cost of being insufficiently prepared for disasters in terms of numbers of casualties and
monetary value.”
The result demonstrates progress made in 2018 towards the collective attainment of the objective.


       27.30      A planned result for 2018, which is increased national capacity and commitment to reduce disaster
                  risk and implement the Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction 2015–2030, as referred to in
                  the proposed programme budget for the biennium 2018–2019, was achieved, as evidenced by the
                  increased number of countries adopting development frameworks, policies and national programmes
                  to implement disaster risk reduction strategies and the increased number of countries reporting on
                  progress in the implementation of the Sendai Framework.


             4.   Highlighted planned result for 2020

Disaster risk reduction strategies created through coherence, inclusiveness and partnerships
2018 was another year of devastating events that claimed many lives and destroyed entire communities. Disasters
are a constant reminder that whatever progress has been made in reducing disaster risk, it is still not enough. In the
words of Kawsu Barrow of the National Disaster Management Agency of the Gambia and Sendai Framework
monitor focal point, “The world is making efforts in achieving the Sustainable Development Goals with huge
financial and human resources involved, but little or no attention is give n to disaster risk reduction in the process.
Disaster risk reduction should be given the highest priority in our development agendas to reduce the burden on
our respective economies”.
In 2018, the United Nations Office for Disaster Risk Reduction collabor ated with partners to support and advise
Governments to substantially increase the number of countries with national and local disaster risk reduction
strategies by 2020, recognized as target (e) of the Sendai Framework. The achievement of that target is c ritical to
achieving the other six targets of the Sendai Framework, to be met by 2030.

Challenge and response
An analysis on the progress made towards achieving target (e) concluded that the challenge was to improve the
quality of such national strategies. The United Nations Office for Disaster Risk Reduction identified the following
specific areas to strengthen the effectiveness and impact or such strategies: (a) fostering a coherent approach with
national adaptation plans, incorporating the understanding of risks resulting from climate change; (b) ensuring the
strategies are inclusive and have been developed with the involvement of the whole of society, with particular focus
on the participation of and leadership by women, young people and persons with disabilities; (c) ensuring strategies
cover the 10 recommended core requirements; and (d) ensuring they have been developed with “whole-of-
government” engagement and buy-in to foster interministerial and interdepartmental coherence and adequate
budget allocations.
In response, for 2020, the United Nations Office for Disaster Risk Reduction will focus on capacity dev elopment,
dissemination and roll-out of the “words into action” guidelines on how to develop effective national and local
disaster risk reduction strategies, and the provision of technical support at the local, national and regional levels.
This will also include continuing to support the consistency of national disaster risk reduction strategies with
national adaptation plans. In addition, efforts will be scaled up by the Office, in coordination with global partners,
to assist local governments in developing their local disaster risk reduction strategies, aligned with national
strategies, building on the guidance and tools developed.
The Office will support peer-to-peer learning, the sharing of lessons learned and good practices and cooperation
between countries, cities, local governments and different stakeholders. It will also provide analysis on how to
integrate the prevention of disaster-related displacement into disaster risk reduction strategies and activities. In
Asia alone, more than 18 million people were displaced in 2018 owing to climate and disasters. That figure is likely
to grow, especially in the face of a changing climate. Finally, the Office will support Governments in creating

19-03801                                                                                                          15/42
Part VI         Human rights and humanitarian affairs

strategies that reduce the impact of disasters on the poorest an d most vulnerable, as well as on women, children,
people with disabilities and older people. Steps for achieving this reduction of impact include building their
capacity, engaging them in risk assessments and disaster risk reduction activities and developi ng gender responsive
programming, such as early warning and risk communication geared towards the ir needs.

Result and evidence
The planned deliverables are expected to contribute to the result, which is a more effective, coordinated and
strategic approach to disaster risk reduction.
Evidence of the result, if achieved, will include over 120 countries having national and local disaster risk reduction
strategies, thus achieving an increase in the number of Member States that meet target (e) of the Sendai F ramework
by 2020, as shown in the figure.
The result, if achieved, will demonstrate progress made in 2020 towards the collective attainment of the objective.

Performance measures: number of countries that develop/improve national and local disaster risk
reduction strategies

 150

 100                                                                                             120

  50                                                            77
                        51
   0
                       2018                                    2019                              2020



        27.31   The subprogramme will continue to be guided by all mandates entrusted to it, which provide the
                legislative framework for its deliverables.


           5.   Deliverables for the period 2018–2020

        27.32   The below table lists all deliverables, by category and subcategory, for the period 2018–2020 that
                contributed and are expected to contribute to the attainment of the objective stated above.

                Table 27.3
                Subprogramme 3: deliverables for the period 2018–2020, by category and subcategory

                                                                                          2018    2018        2019      2020
                                                                                       planned   actual    planned   planned


                Quantified deliverables
                A. Facilitation of the intergovernmental process and expert bodies
                   Parliamentary documentation (number of documents)                       14       14         15        13
                   Substantive services for meetings (number of three-hour meetings)        1          1        1         1
                B. Generation and transfer of knowledge
                   Field and technical cooperation projects (number of projects)           36       36         36        36
                   Seminars, workshops and training events (number of days)               326     326         323       323
                   Publications (number of publications)                                    3          3        4         3
                   Technical materials (number of materials)                               14       14         11        11




16/42                                                                                                                19-03801
Section 27        Humanitarian assistance

             6.   Most significant relative variances of deliverables

                  Variances between the planned figures for 2020 and 2019
       27.33      The variance in parliamentary documentation is driven by two resolutions of the General Assembly
                  second committee under the sub-item on “disaster risk reduction”, owing to the periodicity of those
                  reports. One such resolution, entitled “Disaster risk reduction” is adopted annually and the other,
                  entitled “Effective global response to address the impacts of the El Niño phenomenon ”, is adopted
                  biennially. Therefore, the latter resolution will not be on th e agenda of the Subprogramme for 2019.
                  In addition, the New York Liaison Office of the United Nations Office for Disaster Risk Reduction
                  conducted a review of outcome documents of intergovernmental deliberations at the General
                  Assembly and the Economic and Social Council and identified those documents of most relevance
                  to the advancement of the Sendai Framework and the disaster risk reduction agenda through policy -
                  setting and cross-sectoral policy coherence. The number is therefore determined by the number of
                  intergovernmental processes/deliberations and their subsequent outcome documents that are relevant
                  to disaster risk reduction each year. Some processes are annual, some are biennial and others are
                  one-offs, hence the difference between each year.
       27.34      The variance in publications is driven by the production in 2019 of the United Nations Office for
                  Disaster Risk Reduction work programme for the biennium 2020–2021, which will not be produced
                  in 2020.




19-03801                                                                                                          17/42
Part VI         Human rights and humanitarian affairs




                Subprogramme 4
                Emergency support services

           1.   Objective

        27.35   The objective, to which this subprogramme contributes, is to expedite international humanitarian
                assistance to victims of emergencies and natural disasters.


           2.   Alignment with the Sustainable Development Goals

        27.36   Given its broad scope, the objective is aligned with all of the Sustainable Development Goals.


           3.   Highlighted result in 2018

Rapid, well-coordinated and prioritized responses for sudden-onset emergencies
Between 2014 and 2017, disasters caused by natural
hazards affected more than 870 million people per
year in more than 160 countries and territories around
the world. To prepare for rapid response in sudden-
onset emergencies, the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs manages different emergency
response mechanisms addressing various response
requirements. By providing support for assessment,
coordination and information management, United
Nations Disaster Assessment and Coordination
supports national and local capacities in coordinating
humanitarian response, improving prioritization and
reducing duplication, to ensure that assistance and
protection reach the people who need it most. The
Office also engages with a broad range of actors,
particularly regional organizations, international and
national NGO networks, donors, the private sector,
diaspora networks and other actors to strengthen their
involvement and participation in humanitarian response. Investments to strengthen its global and regional
partnerships have improved the interoperability of methodology and practice between different emergency resp onse
mechanisms.
In 2018, the Office deployed six United Nations Disaster Assessment and Coordination teams (five response
missions and one preparedness mission) to various disaster-affected areas in support of the national and local
governments’ responses to major humanitarian emergencies. United Nations Disaster Assessment and Coordination
is part of the international emergency response system for sudden -onset emergencies. Natural disasters and climate
change continue to have devastating effects.
In March 2018, following the devastating earthquake in Papua New Guinea, a United Nations Disaster Assessment
and Coordination team, including United Nations emergency responders and representatives of national disaster
relief authorities, was deployed at the request of the Government within 72 hours after receipt of the request. The
team was mainly composed of United Nations Disaster Assessment and Coordination members from or working in

18/42                                                                                                        19-03801
Section 27        Humanitarian assistance

the region to ensure a local approach to augmenting in-country capacity and existing structures. The team helped
to establish the coordination structures at the national and local levels, supported initial needs assessments, provided
technical expertise (e.g. in environmental management) and situational analysis and advocated for resource
mobilization for the response. Over the course of its mission, the United Nations Disaster Assessment and
Coordination team helped to streamline coordination and communication at the national level, working alongside
governmental entities. To increase cluster capacity, the team supported the disaster management team in
establishing and chairing weekly inter-cluster coordination meetings, which soon became a critical coordination
body to share common concerns and inform all stakeholders about humani tarian priorities.
By sharing information and knowledge, the team helped to bridge the information flow between the two major
private companies and the disaster management team. United Nations Disaster Assessment and Coordination
products, including a “who does what where” database and snapshots, included information received by the private
companies that allowed for an improved operational overview. Following advocacy work performed by the
subprogramme with national partners and the humanitarian country t eam for structured assessments, the disaster
management team initiated the sectoral vulnerability and assessment mapping, also covering health and school
facilities. With the available baseline data and some assessment data, the United Nations Disaster Ass essment and
Coordination team produced interactive snapshots and maps that allowed partners to gain access to collected data
and get an operational overview.

Result and evidence
The deliverables contributed to the result, which is a rapid, well -coordinated and prioritized response by all
humanitarian actors that enabled the responders on the ground to focus on saving lives and preventing possible
secondary impacts, such as potential environmental emergencies. Evidence of the result includes the rapid
mobilization of $24 million to provide life-saving assistance to priority needs of 270,000 people in earthquake -
affected areas.
The result demonstrates progress made in 2018 towards the collective attainment of the objective.


       27.37      A planned result for 2018, which is prompt mobilization of international emergency response
                  mechanisms to facilitate international humanitarian assistance to victims of disasters and
                  emergencies, as referred to in the proposed programme budget for the biennium 2018–2019, was
                  achieved, as evidenced by international assistance being provided to the affected country within
                  48 hours of its request for international assistance. In 2018, United Nations Disaster Assessment and
                  Coordination response missions were deployed to Colombia ( oil spill), Indonesia (earthquake/
                  tsunami), Nigeria (floods, 2 missions) and Papua New Guinea (earthquake), all within 48 hours of
                  receiving the request for international coordination assistance.


             4.   Highlighted planned result for 2020

Enhanced capacity for rapid response coordination
In 2018, in partnership with the Government of the Philippines, the Office co -organized the Asia-Pacific earthquake
response exercise in Clark, Pampanga Province. This was the largest earthquake response e xercise of the
International Search and Rescue Advisory Group in the Asia -Pacific region since 2004. Based on a likely
earthquake scenario, the exercise brought together 500 participants (220 international/280 national) from
27 countries representing national and international urban search and rescue teams, emergency medical teams,
Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) national assessment teams, the humanitarian country team in the
Philippines and the military. The exercise served to practise the g overnment disaster response plans and increase
awareness of all the participants of internationally accepted disaster response coordination methodologies.




19-03801                                                                                                           19/42
Part VI         Human rights and humanitarian affairs

Challenge and response
The challenge, as identified in the exercise, was the need to further strengthen national, ASEAN and international
response mechanisms for greater interoperability and to better harness the collective synergies of a more integrated
and coordinated international assistance approach in support of a Member State affected by a natural disaster.
In response, for 2020, the subprogramme will customize for specific partners its capacity -building activities on
search and rescue methodology. This will ensure greater emphasis on the comparative advantage and complementarity
of national and international response mechanisms through training needs assessments and analyses of feedback.

Result and evidence
The planned deliverable is expected to contribute to the result, which is enhanced national, regional and
international urban search and rescue response capacity. Evidence of the result, if achieved, will include the
adoption by 70 national Governments and urban search and rescue teams of the International Search and Rescue
Advisory Group methodology for preparedness and response at the national and international levels.
The result, if achieved, will demonstrate progress made in 2020 towards the collective attainment of the objective.

Performance measures

2018                                       2019                                2020


                                                                               Adoption by 70 national
                                                                               Governments and urban search and
                                           Training methodologies and          rescue teams of International
                                           products for search and rescue      Search and Rescue Advisory Group
Improved interoperability among            teams are harmonized and updated
urban search and rescue teams is                                               methodology for preparedness and
                                           to strengthen interoperability of   response at the national and
defined as one of the priorities for       response mechanisms.
International Search and Rescue                                                international levels.
Advisory Group training.



        27.38   The subprogramme will continue to be guided by all mandates entrusted to it, which provide the
                legislative framework for its deliverables.


           5.   Deliverables for the period 2018–2020

        27.39   The below table lists all deliverables, by category and subcategory, for the period 2018–2020, that
                contributed and are expected to contribute to the attainment of the objective stated above.




20/42                                                                                                        19-03801
Section 27   Humanitarian assistance

             Table 27.4
             Subprogramme 4: deliverables for the period 2018–2020, by category and subcategory

                                                                                   2018    2018       2019      2020
                                                                                planned   actual   planned   planned


             Quantified deliverables
             B. Generation and transfer of knowledge
                Seminars, workshops and training events (number of days)            55       55        50        50
             Non-quantified deliverables
             C. Substantive deliverables
                Consultation, advice and advocacy
                Humanitarian assistance missions
                Databases and substantive digital materials
             D. Communication deliverables
                Outreach programmes, special events and information materials
                Digital platforms and multimedia content




19-03801                                                                                                      21/42
Part VI         Human rights and humanitarian affairs




                Subprogramme 5
                Humanitarian emergency information and advocacy
           1.   Objective
        27.40   The objective, to which this subprogramme contributes, is to ensure effective advocacy of
                humanitarian principles and knowledge-sharing, in serving populations affected by disasters and
                emergencies.

           2.   Alignment with the Sustainable Development Goals
        27.41   Given its broad scope, the objective is aligned with all of the Sustainable Development Goals.

           3.   Highlighted result in 2018

Timely and reliable information on unfolding emergencies and natural disasters available to
humanitarian actors
In 2018, the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs provided timely and reliable
information on unfolding emergencies and natural
disasters in support of decision-making and
humanitarian action on the ground. It strengthened its
systems for the collection, analysis, dissemination and
sharing of humanitarian information. For instance, in
Nigeria, the subprogramme provided timely and
regular information on humanitarian needs and
progress in the response actions by the humanitarian
community in the country.

Result and evidence
The deliverable contributed to the result, which is
increased access by humanitarian actors, Member States
and other stakeholders to information on the evolving
humanitarian situation and gaps in the response.
Evidence of the result includes the establishment of an information management network in Nigeria that supports
emergency coordination and establishes processes for the various organizations involved to collect, analyse and
share information about the emergency situation. The network includes people affected by the emergency as well
as relief organizations, Governments and media outlets. Evidence also includes a 3 1 per cent increase in 2018 in
the use of Reliefweb, the world’s largest humanitarian information platform, which is managed by the
subprogramme and brings together thousands of humanitarian reports and analyses from hundreds of organizations
across all active crises. More people from more places than ever before have access to humanitarian information.
In 2018, over 16 million people visited the web platforms of the Office to find information on current humanitarian
crises, and more than 9 million people visited Reliefweb. Those visitors came from different sectors, including
humanitarian workers, Member States, media, the private sector, academia and civil society.
The result demonstrates progress made in 2018 towards the collective attainment of the objective.



22/42                                                                                                        19-03801
Section 27        Humanitarian assistance

       27.42      A planned result for 2018, which is better informed decision-making by the humanitarian community
                  through access to relevant information, as referred to in the proposed programme budget for the
                  biennium 2018–2019, was achieved, as evidenced by the increased number of unique visitors to the
                  core web platforms of the Office. The number of visitors to all web platforms in 2018 was over
                  16 million, making it in line to achieve the goal for the biennium 2018–2019.


             4.   Highlighted planned result for 2020

Streamlined information for responders through digital humanitarian situation reports – a faster, more
dynamic and analytical tool
The Office brings together information from humanitarian partners to create a common operational picture of a
humanitarian situation. While the United Nations and NGO partners collect sector-specific information, such as
information on shelter requirements or food consumption, the Office is tasked with bringing that information
together in order to gain a higher-level understanding. In 2018, protracted and complex crisis situations involving
many different response actors increasingly called for joined -up planning in order to develop complementary
response strategies.

Challenge and response
The challenge was to process information and make analytical content readily available to decision makers to
provide a common operational picture as a basis for multisectoral approaches and joined -up planning between
various response stakeholders.
In response, for 2020, the subprogramme will further develop its analytical information products, for example the
digital humanitarian situation report in order to provide operational information on current needs, responses and
gaps in a given emergency in a faster, more dynamic and analytical format.

Result and evidence
The planned deliverable is expected to contribute to the result, which is more streamlined information for rapid,
effective and principled humanitarian response.
Evidence of the result, if achieved, will include digital humanita rian situation reports used in a greater number of
humanitarian crises.
The result, if achieved, will demonstrate progress made in 2020 towards the collective attainment of the objective.

Performance measures

2018                                        2019                               2020


                                                                               Use of digital humanitarian
                                                                               situation reports in 11 humanitarian
                                            Use of digital humanitarian        crises
                                            situation reports in seven
Use of first digital humanitarian           humanitarian crises
situation reports piloted in three
humanitarian crises



       27.43      The subprogramme will continue to be guided by all mandates entrusted to it, which provide the
                  legislative framework for its deliverables.




19-03801                                                                                                        23/42
Part VI         Human rights and humanitarian affairs

           5.   Deliverables for 2020

        27.44   Table 27.5 lists all deliverables, by category and subcategory, planned for 2020 that are expected to
                contribute to the attainment of the objective stated above.

                Table 27.5
                Subprogramme 5: deliverables for 2020, by category and subcategory

                Non-quantified deliverables
                C. Substantive deliverables
                   Consultation, advice and advocacy
                   Databases and substantive digital materials
                D. Communication deliverables
                   Outreach programmes, special events and information materials
                   External and media relations
                   Digital platforms and multimedia content
                E. Enabling deliverables
                   Information and communications technology




24/42                                                                                                         19-03801
Section 27          Humanitarian assistance

             B. Proposed post and non-post resource requirements for 2020
                    Overview

        27.45       The total resource requirements for 2020, comprising the regular budget and projected
                    extrabudgetary resources, are reflected in the figure 27.II and table 27.6.

Figure 27.II
2020 in numbers

 Regular budget                                                                     Extrabudgetary
                   $17.9 million: total resource                                                    $333.8 million: total resource
                   requirements                                                                     requirements
                       $12.1 million post                                                               $212.1 million post
                       $5.8 million non-post                                                            $121.7 million non-post

                   5% of total resource                                                             95% of total resource


                   No change in total resources compared                                            $7.6 million: increase compared with
                   with 2019                                                                        2019

                   72 posts                                                                         1,994 posts
                       55 Professional and above                                                        781 Professional and higher
                       17 General Service                                                               1,213 General Service

Note: Estimates before recosting.

Table 27.6
Overview of financial and post resources by component, subprogramme and funding source
(Thousands of United States dollars/number of posts)


                                                       Regular budget                       Extrabudgetary                          Total

                                                                  2020
                                                              estimate
                                                 2019          (before                   2019         2020                   2019        2020
Component                                appropriation      recosting)   Variance    estimate     estimate   Variance    estimate    estimate   Variance


Financial resources by subprogramme
Executive direction and
management                                    5 265.8       4 741.8      (524.0)     5 916.3     5 754.9     (161.4)    11 182.1    10 496.7    (685.4)
Programme of work
1. Policy and analysis                          788.0          569.9     (218.1)     4 823.6     4 920.0        96.4     5 611.6     5 489.9    (121.7)
2. Coordination of humanitarian
   action and emergency response              5 532.3       5 044.3      (488.0) 214 279.8 217 446.4 3 166.6 219 812.1 222 490.7 2 678.6
3. Natural disaster risk reduction            1 312.2       1 312.2            –    41 210.3    43 404.6 2 194.3        42 522.5    44 716.8 2 194.3
4. Emergency support services                 1 786.9       3 059.7 1 272.8         20 849.5    21 266.5      417.0     22 636.4    24 326.2 1 689.8
5. Humanitarian emergency
   information and advocacy                   1 555.1       1 555.1            –    17 256.4    17 601.5      345.1     18 811.5    19 156.6     345.1

    Subtotal, programme of work             10 974.5 11 541.2             566.7 298 419.6 304 639.0 6 219.4 309 394.1 316 180.2 6 786.1

Programme support                             1 656.6       1 613.9       (42.7)    22 899.7    23 357.7      458.0     24 556.3    24 971.6     415.3

    Total                                   17 896.9 17 896.9                  – 327 235.6 333 751.6 6 516.0 345 132.5 351 648.5 6 516.0


19-03801                                                                                                                                          25/42
Part VI             Human rights and humanitarian affairs


                                                   Regular budget                            Extrabudgetary                                Total

                                                              2020
                                                          estimate
                                                2019       (before                       2019          2020                       2019          2020
Component                               appropriation   recosting)     Variance      estimate      estimate     Variance      estimate      estimate      Variance

Post resources by subprogramme
Executive direction and
management                                         11             8        (3)              26             25       (1)            37               33         (4)
Programme of work
1. Policy and analysis                              4             3        (1)              22             22         –            26               25         (1)
2. Coordination of humanitarian
   action and emergency response                   29         26           (3)        1 619          1 615          (4)         1 648        1 641             (7)
3. Natural disaster risk reduction                  1             1          –          108            108            –           109              109           –
4. Emergency support services                      10         17             7              86             86         –            96              103           7
5. Humanitarian emergency
   information and advocacy                        10         10             –              68             68         –            78               78           –

    Subtotal, programme of work                    54         57             3        1 903          1 899          (4)         1 957        1 956             (1)

Programme support                                   7             7          –              70             70         –            77               77           –

    Total                                          72         72             –        1 999          1 994          (5)         2 071        2 066             (5)



                    Overview of resources for the regular budget

        27.46       The proposed regular budget resources for 2020, including the breakdown of resource changes and
                    redeployment of posts across components are reflected in tables 27.7 and 27.8. Further details are
                    provided under the respective components. The proposed resource level provides for the full,
                    efficient and effective implementation of mandates.

Table 27.7
Evolution of financial resources by component and main category of expenditure
(Thousands of United States dollars)


                                                                                  Changes
                                                                                                                                 2020                         2020
                                                                          New/                                               estimate                     estimate
                               2018          2019    Technical        expanded                                                (before                         after
                         expenditure appropriation adjustments        mandates       Other         Total    Percentage     recosting)    Recosting       recosting


Financial resources by component
Executive direction
and management              6 097.3      5 265.8              –              –    (524.0)        (524.0)        (10.0)      4 741.8        133.0          4 874.8
Programme of work         10 333.7      10 974.5              –              –      566.7         566.7            5.2     11 541.2        351.8         11 893.0
Programme support           1 257.3      1 656.6              –              –      (42.7)        (42.7)         (2.6)      1 613.9          36.6         1 650.5

    Total                 17 688.3      17 896.9              –              –           –            –              –     17 896.9        521.4         18 418.3

Financial resources by main category of expenditure
Post                      12 066.1      12 031.8              –              –       42.7          42.7            0.4     12 074.5        465.5         12 540.0
Non-post                    5 622.2      5 865.1              –              –      (42.7)        (42.7)         (0.7)      5 822.4          55.9         5 878.3

    Total                 17 688.3      17 896.9              –              –           –            –              –     17 896.9        521.4         18 418.3




26/42                                                                                                                                                     19-03801
Section 27        Humanitarian assistance

Table 27.8
Evolution of post resources by category

                                                                Changes

                                                   Technical    New/expanded
                                2019 approved    adjustments        mandates           Other     2020 estimate   Variance


Professional and higher
    USG                                      1            –               –               –                 1          –
    ASG                                      1                                                              1
    D-2                                      3            –               –               –                 3          –
    D-1                                      4            –               –               –                 4          –
    P-5                                     11            –               –               –                11          –
    P-4                                     16            –               –               –                16          –
    P-3                                     14            –               –               –                14          –
    P-2/1                                    5            –               –               –                 5          –

    Subtotal                                55            –               –               –                55          –

General Service
    Principal level                          2            –               –               –                 2          –
    Other level                             15            –               –               –                15          –

    Subtotal                                17            –               –               –                17          –

    Total                                   72            –               –               –                72          –

Note: The breakdown of post changes by component, subprogramme and post level is provided in annex II.
Abbreviations: ASG, Assistant Secretary-General; USG, Under-Secretary-General.


                  Executive direction and management

          27.47   The role and functions of the Emergency Relief Coordinator were defined by the General Assembly
                  in its resolution 46/182 and streamlined by the Assembly in resolutions 52/12 A and B and in the
                  report of the Secretary-General on reform (A/51/950), which called for the strengthening of three
                  core functions: policy development and coordination on humanitarian issues; advocacy of
                  humanitarian issues with political organs; and coordination of humanitarian emergency response.
          27.48   The Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency Relief Coordinator provides
                  overall direction, management and policy guidance to the offices in New York, Geneva and in the
                  field. He or she provides leadership in the coordination of the overall response of the international
                  community, particularly that of the United Nations system, to d isasters and humanitarian
                  emergencies; undertakes humanitarian diplomacy with Governments of affected countries, including
                  the facilitation of access to emergency areas for rapid delivery of humanitarian assistance; consults
                  with the donor community and other interested States on issues related to the provision of emergency
                  humanitarian assistance; chairs the Inter-Agency Standing Committee and oversees the
                  implementation of its decisions; manages the Central Emergency Response Fund and its loan
                  component; mobilizes resources and support for emergency humanitarian programmes of the United
                  Nations system; steers the development of policies for humanitarian assistance, in coordination with
                  relevant partners; serves as the advocate for humanitarian issues on be half of the United Nations
                  system; and promotes better understanding by the public of humanitarian assistance issues. The
                  Coordinator acts as the main adviser of the Secretary-General on humanitarian issues and cooperates
                  closely with other United Nations offices in the planning and coordination of United Nations
                  humanitarian assistance activities in crisis situations. The Coordinator also chairs the Executive


19-03801                                                                                                           27/42
Part VI         Human rights and humanitarian affairs

                Committee on Humanitarian Affairs. He or she is assisted by an Assistant Secretary -General for
                Humanitarian Affairs, who also acts as the Deputy Emergency Relief Coordinator.
        27.49   The offices in New York and Geneva support the Emergency Relief Coordinator. The New York
                office includes the Office of the Under-Secretary-General, which assists in the management of the
                Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs as a whole, ensuring complementarity of
                activities and close cooperation between the two offices.
        27.50   The Deputy Emergency Relief Coordinator, based in New York, assists the Coordinator in providing
                the overall direction, management and supervision of the offices in New York and Geneva, as well
                as in supporting the Office’s coordination in the field, and provides advice to the Coordinator on all
                matters relating to the mandate of the Office. The Deputy interacts with Member States,
                intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations and operational humanitarian agencies, as
                well as those departments of the Secretariat whose responsibilities encompass peacekeeping,
                political and economic activities. The Deputy also oversees the strategic planning and evaluation
                functions of the Office, serves as the Chair of the Inter-Agency Standing Committee Working Group,
                acts for the Coordinator in his or her absence and represents him or her, as requi red, in United
                Nations bodies, organizations and conferences.
        27.51   The Director of the Operations and Advocacy Division is responsible for management and oversight
                of the humanitarian coordination leadership in the field, as well as for management of the field
                operations. He or she leads the Inter-Agency Standing Committee Emergency Directors Group on
                operational issues and ensures the formulation of a coherent and timely United Nations response to
                major and complex emergencies.
        27.52   The Director of the Humanitarian Financing and Resource Mobilization Division is responsible for
                the humanitarian finances and resource mobilization functions. The Director of the Coordination
                Division, based in Geneva, is primarily responsible for the emergency services man aged by the
                Office on behalf of the United Nations system and for managing relations with Member States,
                donors and partners.
        27.53   The secretariat of the Inter-Agency Standing Committee supports the Under-Secretary-General for
                Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency Relief Coordinator in his or her capacity as Chair of the
                Committee and also supports the Deputy in his or her function as Chair of the Committee ’s Working
                Group. The secretariat facilitates the work of the Committee in relation to policy developme nt and
                advocacy in the humanitarian sector. It services the meetings of the Committee and its working
                groups; supports the subsidiary bodies; maintains administrative and consultative communication
                channels among the members; and monitors implementation of the decisions of the Committee.
        27.54   The role and functions of the United Nations Monitoring Mechanism for the Syrian Arab Republic
                were defined by the Security Council in resolution 2165 (2014), in which the Council authorized the
                United Nations humanitarian agencies and their implementing partners to use the Syrian border
                crossings of Bab al-Salam and Bab al-Hawa with Turkey, Al Yarubiyah with Iraq and Al-Ramtha
                with Jordan, in order to ensure that humanitarian assistance reaches people in need throughout the
                Syrian Arab Republic through the most direct routes, with notification to the Syrian authorities.
        27.55   Established under the authority of the United Nations Secretary-General, the Mechanism monitors,
                with the consent of the relevant neighbouring countries of the Syrian Arab Republic, the loading of
                all humanitarian relief consignments of the United Nations humanitarian agencies and their
                implementing partners at the relevant United Nations facili ties and any subsequent opening of the
                consignments by the customs authorities of the relevant neighbouring countries, for passage into the
                Syrian Arab Republic across the above-mentioned border crossings, in order to confirm the
                humanitarian nature of these relief consignments.
        27.56   In accordance with the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, particularly target 12.6 of the
                Sustainable Development Goals to encourage organizations to integrate sustainability information
                into their reporting cycle, and in compliance with the cross-cutting mandate of the General-Assembly
                in paragraph 19 of its resolution 72/219, the Office is integrating environmental management


28/42                                                                                                          19-03801
Section 27           Humanitarian assistance

                     practices into its operations. In 2018, a highlight for the Office is its cla im of climate neutrality, in
                     the sense applied within the United Nations system. The Office has been listed as a climate -neutral
                     agency in the 2018 “Greening the Blue” report. The Office’s joint unit with the United Nations
                     Environment Programme, through its engagement in a joint initiative, developed standards for the
                     coordination of environment assessments in humanitarian action.
        27.57        In 2020, the Office will systematically measure and report on environmental performance, based on
                     a mapping of material environmental impacts; reduce adverse environmental impacts by
                     implementing an environmental management system; and maintain climate neutrality through a
                     variety of initiatives. Such initiatives include increasing its use of videoconference and remote
                     meeting options, the consistent review of its vehicle fleet to ensure replacements are made only if
                     required and the use of shared facilities when safe, practical and in line with the humanitarian
                     principles in order to reduce its environmental footprint.
        27.58        Information on compliance with regard to timely submission of documentation and advanced
                     booking for air travel is reflected in table 27.9 below.

Table 27.9
Compliance rate
(Percentage)


                                                                                       Planned     Actual    Planned    Planned
                                                                                          2018      2018        2019       2020


Timely submission of documentation                                                        100        100        100        100
Air tickets purchased at least 2 weeks before the commencement of travel                  100         70        100        100


        27.59        The proposed regular budget resources for 2020 amount to $4,741,800 and reflect a net decrease of
                     $524,000 compared with the appropriation for 2019. Additional details are reflected in figures 27.III
                     and 27.IV and table 27.10.


Figure 27.III
Executive direction and management resources as a percentage of overall regular budget resources
(Millions of United States dollars)




                                                    5.3       Approved                                 Proposed         13.2
     6.1          Expenditure               11.6                               12.6         4.7
                                                   29%                                                                  74%
    34%                                                         2019           71%         26%           2020
                     2018                   66%




           Executive direction and management               Other components




19-03801                                                                                                                  29/42
Part VI                Human rights and humanitarian affairs

Table 27.10
Executive direction and management: evolution of financial and post resources
(Thousands of United States dollars/number of posts)


                                                                                                      Changes
                                                                                                                                                                            2020
                                                                                                      New/                                                              estimates
                                                2018             2019          Technical          expanded         Other        Resource Percentage                       (before
                                         expenditures    appropriation       adjustments          mandates       changes         change      change                    recosting)


Financial resources by main category of expenditure
Post                                         2 308.9           2 054.5                –                 –               –       (524.0)            (25.5)                1 530.5
Non-post                                     3 788.4           3 211.3                –                 –               –                –                   –           3 211.3

      Total                                  6 097.3           5 265.8                –                 –               –       (524.0)            (10.0)                4 741.8

Posts resources by category
Professional and higher                                                7              –                 –             (1)             (1)          (14.2)                      6
General Service and related                                            4              –                 –             (2)             (2)              (50)                    2

      Total                                                           11              –                 –             (3)             (3)          (27.3)                      8


Figure 27.IV
Executive direction and management: distribution of proposed resources for 2020 (before recosting)
(Number of posts/thousands of United States dollars)


         Distribution of posts            Distribution of financial resources                          Distribution of non-post financial resources
                8 posts                                $4 741.8                                                          $3 211.3


                                                                                           2 264.7                                       Other staff costs
       USG     1
                                                                                           0.5                                           Hospitality and related costs

                                                                                           9.1                                           Consultants
       ASG     1
                                                                                           546.3                                         Travel on official business

                                                                                           41.4                                          Contractual services
        P-5    3                              Post                         Non-post
                                            1 530.5                         3 211.3
                                                                                           243.1                                         General operating expenses

                                                                                           23.0                                          Supplies and materials
        P-3    1
                                                                                           2.5                                           Furniture and equipment

                                                                                                                                         Construction alteration
                                                                                           3.0
                                                                                                                                             maintenance
Other levels   2
                                                                                                                                         Fellowships, grants and
                                                                                           77.7
                                                                                                                                              contributions


Abbreviations: ASG, Assistant Secretary-General; USG, Under-Secretary-General.

           27.60       The variance of $524,000 reflects:
                       Other changes. The decrease under posts relates to the outward redeployment of one post of Director
                       of Programme Management (D-2) and one post of Assistant (General Service (Other level)) to
                       subprogramme 2, the outward redeployment of one post of Director of Humanitaria n Affairs (D-2)
                       and one post of Assistant (General Service (Other level)) to subprogramme 4 and the inward
                       redeployment of one post of Senior Humanitarian Affairs Officer (P -5) from subprogramme 1 owing
                       to the optimization of the management structure of the Office.
           27.61       Extrabudgetary resources estimated at $5,754,900 would provide for 25 posts, as reflected in
                       table 27.6. The resources would provide strategic direction and management guidance in support of
                       the implementation of the mandates under the programme and to respond to natural disasters and


30/42                                                                                                                                                                    19-03801
Section 27           Humanitarian assistance

                     complex emergencies. The decrease of $161,400 compared with the estimates for 2019 reflects the
                     anticipated level of contribution expected in 2020.


                     Programme of work

        27.62        The proposed regular budget resources for 2020 amount to $11,541,200 and reflect a net increase of
                     $566,700 compared to the appropriation for 2019. Additional details are reflected in figures 27.V
                     and 27.VI and table 27.11.

Figure 27.V
Programme of work: resources as a percentage of overall regular budget resources
(Millions of United States dollars)




                                                           11.0
    10.3         Expenditure                                               Approved                          11.5         Proposed
                                                           61%                                                                                6.4
    58%                                                                                                      64%
                    2018                   7.4                               2019               6.9                         2020             36%
                                          42%                                                  39%




                   Programme of work                                   Other components


Table 27.11
Programme of work: evolution of financial and post resources
(Thousands of United States dollars/number of posts)


                                                                                                      Changes                                   2020
                                                                                                                                            estimates
                                                   2018            2019      Technical    New/ expanded      Other                            (before
                                            expenditures   appropriation   adjustments         mandates    changes      Total Percentage   recosting)


Financial resources by subprogramme
1. Policy and analysis                            735.1           788.0             –                 –   (218.1)    (218.1)     (27.7)       569.9
2. Coordination of humanitarian
   action and emergency response                 5 025.8       5 532.3              –                 –   (488.6)    (488.6)       (8.8)    5 044.3
3. Natural disaster risk reduction               1 283.3       1 312.2              –                 –         –          –          –     1 312.2
4. Emergency support services                    1 716.8       1 786.9              –                 –   1 272.8    1 272.8       71.2     3 059.7
5. Humanitarian emergency
   information and advocacy                      1 572.7       1 555.1              –                 –         –          –          –     1 555.1

     Total                                    10 333.7        10 974.5              –                 –     566.7     566.7         5.2    11 541.2

Financial resources by main category of expenditure
Post                                             8 814.6       9 086.8              –                 –     566.7     566.7         6.2     9 653.5
Non-post                                         1 519.1       1 887.7              –                 –         –          –          –     1 887.7

     Total                                    10 333.7        10 974.5              –                 –     566.7     566.7         5.2    11 541.2




19-03801                                                                                                                                       31/42
Part VI              Human rights and humanitarian affairs


                                                                                                          Changes                                 2020
                                                                                                                                              estimates
                                                     2018            2019        Technical   New/ expanded       Other                          (before
                                              expenditures   appropriation     adjustments        mandates     changes    Total Percentage   recosting)


Post resources by subprogramme
1. Policy and analysis                                                     4            –                 –         (1)    (1)     (25.0)              3
2. Coordination of humanitarian
   action and emergency response                                       29               –                 –         (3)    (3)     (10.3)           26
3. Natural disaster risk reduction                                         1            –                 –           –      –          –              1
4. Emergency support services                                          10               –                 –           7      7       70.0           17
5. Humanitarian emergency
   information and advocacy                                            10               –                 –           –      –          –           10

     Total                                                             54               –                 –           3      3        5.6           57


Figure 27.VI
Distribution of resources for 2020 by subprogramme
(Millions of United States dollars)


                                                                                       1.0          2.0         3.0       4.0         5.0        6.0

                                                 1. Policy and analysis

 2. Coordination of humanitarian action and emergency response

                                      3. Natural disaster risk reduction

                                        4. Emergency support services

             5. Humanitarian emergency information and advocacy




                     Subprogramme 1
                     Policy and analysis

        27.63        The proposed regular budget resources for 2020 amount to $569,900 and reflect a decrease of
                     $218,100 compared with the appropriation for 2019. Additional details are reflected in table 27.12
                     and figure 27.VII.




32/42                                                                                                                                          19-03801
Section 27          Humanitarian assistance

Table 27.12
Subprogramme 1: evolution of financial and post resources
(Thousands of United States dollars/number of posts)


                                                                                                       Changes
                                                                                                                                               2020
                                                                                                New/                                       estimates
                                              2018             2019          Technical      expanded       Other             Percentage      (before
                                       expenditures    appropriation       adjustments      mandates     changes     Total       change   recosting)


Financial resources by main category of expenditure
Post                                         735.1           788.0                   –            –      (218.1)   (218.1)      (27.7)       569.9

    Total                                    735.1           788.0                   –            –      (218.1)   (218.1)      (27.7)       569.9

Posts resources by category
Professional and higher                                              4               –            –          (1)       (1)      (25.0)            3

    Total                                                            4               –            –          (1)       (1)      (25.0)            3


Figure 27.VII
Subprogramme 1: distribution of proposed resources for 2020 (before recosting)
(Number of posts/thousands of United States dollars)


                                                                         Distribution of posts
                                                                                3 posts




                                                               D-1         1




                                                               P-4         1




                                                               P-3         1




        27.64       The variance of $218,100 reflects:
                    Other changes. The decrease under posts relates to the outward redeployment of one post of Senior
                    Humanitarian Affairs Officer (P-5) to executive direction and management in support of the Strategic
                    Planning, Guidance and Evaluation Section owing to the optimization of the management structure
                    of the Office.
        27.65       Extrabudgetary resources estimated at $4,920,000 would provide for 22 posts, as reflected in
                    table 27.6, that would provide for the implementation of activities related to further increasing
                    collaboration between humanitarian and development partners at the country level. The increase of
                    $96,400 compared with the estimates for 2019 reflects the anticipated level of contribution expected
                    in 2020.




19-03801                                                                                                                                      33/42
Part VI               Human rights and humanitarian affairs

                      Subprogramme 2
                      Coordination of humanitarian action and emergency response

          27.66       The proposed regular budget resources for 2020 amount to $5,044,300 and reflect a decrease of
                      $488,000 compared with the appropriation for 2019. Additional details are reflected in table 27.13
                      and figure 27.VIII. Subprogramme 2 would comprise the Operation s and Advocacy Division and
                      Humanitarian Financing and Resource Mobilization Division.

Table 27.13
Subprogramme 2: evolution of financial and post resources
(Thousands of United States dollars/number of posts)


                                                                                                    Changes

                                                                                          New/                                                       2020 estimates
                                           2018          2019           Technical     expanded                        Resource       Percentage             (before
                                    expenditures appropriation        adjustments      mandate Other changes           change            change          recosting)


Financial resources by main category of expenditure
Post                                    4 552.7          4 800.4                  –             –     (488.0)          (488.0)           (10.2)             4 312.4
Non-post                                  473.1            731.9                  –             –             –                –                 –               731.9

     Total                              5 025.8          5 532.3                  –             –     (488.0)          (488.0)             (8.8)            5 044.3

Posts resources by category
Professional and higher                                        25                 –             –           (4)             (4)          (16.0)                      21
General Service and related                                     4                 –             –             1                1            25.0                      5

     Total                                                     29                 –             –           (3)             (3)          (11.5)                      26


Figure 27.VIII
Subprogramme 2: distribution of proposed resources for 2020 (before recosting)
(Number of posts/thousands of United States dollars)


       Distribution of posts                Distribution of financial resources                     Distribution of non-post financial resources
              26 posts                                   $5 044.3                                                      $731.9


        D-2    2



        P-5    4                                                                         24.1                                          Travel on official business



        P-4    9

                                                 Post                      Non-post
                                               4 312.4                      731.9
        P-3    4



                                                                                                                                       Fellowships, grants and
        P-2    2                                                                         707.8
                                                                                                                                            contributions



Other levels   5




          27.67       The variance of $488,000 reflects:
                      Other changes. The decrease under posts relates to the outward redeployment of one post of Senior
                      Humanitarian Affairs Officer (P-5), one post of Humanitarian Affairs Officer (P -4) and three posts
                      of Humanitarian Affairs Officer (P-3) to subprogramme 4 and the inward redeployment of one post

34/42                                                                                                                                                        19-03801
Section 27          Humanitarian assistance

                    of Director of Programme Management (D-2) and one post of Assistant (General Service (Other
                    level)) from executive direction and management owing to the optimization of the management
                    structure of the Office.
        27.68       Extrabudgetary resources estimated at $217,446,400 would provide for 1,615 posts, as reflected in
                    table 27.6. The resources would provide for the implementation of activities related to ensuring a
                    coherent, effective and timely humanitarian response to alleviate human suff ering in natural disasters
                    and complex emergencies, as well as activities related to effective planning for future emergencies
                    by developing and strengthening contingency funding arrangement. In addition, estimated
                    allocations by its country-based pooled funds and central emergency response fund, the Office’s
                    managed pooled funds to support humanitarian action, will amount to $1,220,000,000 in 2020. The
                    increase of $3,166,600 compared with the estimates for 2019 reflects the anticipated level of
                    contribution expected in 2020.


                    Subprogramme 3
                    Natural disaster risk reduction

        27.69       The proposed regular budget resources for 2020 amount to $1,312,200 and reflect no resource change
                    compared with the appropriation for 2019. Additional details are reflected i n table 27.14 and
                    figure 27.IX.

Table 27.14
Subprogramme 3: evolution of financial and post resources
(Thousands of United States dollars/number of posts)


                                                                                                Changes
                                                                                                                                           2020
                                                                                         New/                                          estimates
                                             2018              2019      Technical   expanded       Other     Resource   Percentage      (before
                                      expenditures     appropriation   adjustments    mandate     changes      change        change   recosting)


Financial resources by main category of expenditure
Post                                        284.3            239.8              –          –              –         –            –       239.8
Non-Post                                    999.0          1 072.4              –          –              –         –            –     1 072.4

    Total                                1 283.3           1 312.2              –          –              –         –            –     1 312.2

Posts resources by category
Professional and higher                                           1             –          –              –         –            –            1

    Total                                                         1             –          –              –         –            –            1




19-03801                                                                                                                                  35/42
Part VI                Human rights and humanitarian affairs

Figure 27.IX
Subprogramme 3: distribution of proposed resources for 2020 (before recosting)
(Number of posts/thousands of United States dollars)


                Distribution of posts            Distribution of financial resources                      Distribution of non-post financial resources
                       1 posts                                $1 312.2                                                      $1 072.4



                                                                                                1.9                                             Contractual services




                                                                                                14.0                                            General operating expenses


          D-1      1                               Post,                      Non-post,
                                                   239.8                       1 072.4

                                                                                                0.5                                             Supplies and materials




                                                                                                                                                Fellowships, grants and
                                                                                                1 056.0
                                                                                                                                                     contributions




        27.70          Extrabudgetary resources estimated at $43,404,600 would provide for 108 posts, as reflected in
                       table 27.6. The resources would provide for the implementation of activities related to work on
                       disaster risk reduction strategies, as well as dissemination and roll out of guidelines on how to
                       develop effective national and local disaster risk reduction strategies, and the provision of technical
                       support at the local, national and regional levels. The increase of $2,194,300 compared with the
                       estimates for 2019 reflects the anticipated level of contribution expected in 2020.


                       Subprogramme 4
                       Emergency support services

        27.71          The proposed regular budget resources for 2020 amount to $3,059,700 and reflect an increase of
                       $1,272,800 compared with the appropriation for 2019. Additional details are reflected in table 27.15
                       and figure 27.X.

Table 27.15
Subprogramme 4: evolution of financial and post resources
(Thousands of United States dollars/number of posts)


                                                                                                              Changes                                                   2020
                                                                                                                                                                    estimates
                                               2018          2019         Technical        New/expanded             Other                    Percentage               (before
                                        expenditures appropriation      adjustments            mandates           changes          Total         change            recosting)


Financial resources by main category of expenditure
Post                                       1 669.8         1 703.5                     –                  –      1 272.8      1 272.8               74.7               2 976.3
Non-post                                      47.0            83.4                     –                  –             –              –                 –                83.4

    Total                                  1 716.8         1 786.9                     –                  –      1 272.8      1 272.8               71.2               3 059.7

Posts resources by category
Professional and higher                                           8                    –                  –             6              6            75.0                     14
General Service and related                                       2                    –                  –             1              1            50.0                      3

    Total                                                        10                    –                  –             7              7            70.0                     17



36/42                                                                                                                                                                  19-03801
Section 27              Humanitarian assistance

Figure 27.X
Subprogramme 4: distribution of proposed resources for 2020 (before recosting)
(Number of posts/thousands of United States dollars)


                Distribution of posts             Distribution of financial resources            Distribution of non-post financial resources
                       17 posts                                $3 059.7                                             $83.4


                D-2    1


                D-1    1


                P-5    2


                P-4    3
                                                         Post                  Non-post                                              Travel on official business
                                                                                          83.4
                                                       2 976.3                   83.4
                P-3    5


                P-2    2


     Principal level   1


       Other levels    2




         27.72          The variance of $1,272,800 reflects:
                        Other changes. The increase under posts relates to the inward redeployment of one post of Director
                        of Humanitarian Affairs (D-2) and one post of Assistant (General Service (Other level)) from
                        executive direction and management, to better align with coordinating/ humanit arian response
                        planning; and the inward redeployment of one post of Senior Humanitarian Affairs Officer (P -5),
                        one post of Humanitarian Affairs Officer (P-4), and three posts of Humanitarian Affairs Officer (P -3)
                        from subprogramme 2 owing to the optimization of the management structure of the Office. The
                        subprogramme would comprise the former Programme Support Branch, the Office of the Director -
                        Geneva and the Emergency Services Branch.
         27.73          Extrabudgetary resources estimated at $21,266,500 would provide for 86 posts, as reflected in
                        table 27.6. The resources would provide for the implementation of activities related to capacity -
                        building on search and rescue methodology and to further strengthening interoperability among
                        national, regional and international response mechanisms for a more integrated international
                        assistance in support of a Member State affected by a natural disaster. The increase of $417,000
                        compared with the estimates for 2019 reflects the anticipated level of contribution expected in 2020.


                        Subprogramme 5
                        Humanitarian emergency information and advocacy

         27.74          The proposed regular budget resources for 2020 amount to $1,555,100 and reflect no resource change
                        compared with the appropriation for 2019. Additional details are reflected in t able 27.16 and
                        figure 27.XI.




19-03801                                                                                                                                                     37/42
Part VI             Human rights and humanitarian affairs

Table 27.16
Subprogramme 5: evolution of financial and post resources
(Thousands of United States dollars/number of posts)


                                                                                                          Changes                                 2020
                                                                                                                                              estimates
                                             2018              2019            Technical   New/expanded        Other            Percentage      (before
                                      expenditures     appropriation         adjustments       mandates      changes    Total       change   recosting)


Financial resources by main category of expenditure
Post                                      1 572.7          1 555.1                    –              –              –      –            –     1 555.1

    Total                                 1 572.7          1 555.1                    –              –              –      –            –     1 555.1

Posts resources by category
Professional and higher                                            7                  –              –              –      –            –            7
General Service and related                                        3                  –              –              –      –            –            3

    Total                                                        10                   –              –              –      –            –           10


Figure 27.XI
Subprogramme 5: distribution of proposed resources for 2020 (before recosting)
(Number of posts/thousands of United States dollars)


                                                                        Distribution of posts
                                                                               10 posts



                                                                     D-1         1




                                                                       P-5       1




                                                                       P-4       3




                                                                       P-3       2




                                                             Other levels        3




        27.75       Extrabudgetary resources estimated at $17,601,500 would provide for 68 posts, as reflected in
                    table 27.6. The resources would provide for the implementation of activities related to the
                    development of analytical information products, such as the digital humanitarian situation report,
                    which provides streamlined information for responders. The increase of $345,100 compared with
                    the estimates for 2019 reflects the anticipated level of contribution expected in 2020.


                    Programme support

        27.76       The Executive Office of the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs comprises two
                    branches: one in New York and one in Geneva. The branches are responsible for performing
                    administrative functions, including those relating to finance and budget, human resources and staff
                    development and training, and for providing administrative support and guidance to staff members.


38/42                                                                                                                                         19-03801
Section 27           Humanitarian assistance

        27.77        The Executive Office in New York oversees the financial, human resources and general
                     administration of the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs and provides guidance on
                     administrative matters. It supports senior management in formulating policies and instructions,
                     including on financial management, workforce planning, rostering and staff development and
                     training. It coordinates departmental programme budgets and presentations to legislative bodies.
        27.78        Under the overall direction of the head of the Executive Office, the Geneva branch manages the
                     receipt and expenditure of funds, supports the procurement of goods and services and undertakes the
                     recruitment, deployment and administration of field staff.
        27.79        During fiscal year 2020, the Executive Office will continue to focus on workforce and succession
                     planning, as well as career and staff development, in line with the human resources strategy. It will
                     also improve financial monitoring and projections of funding requirements for future budgets,
                     managing and effectively utilizing resources, capturing and sharing field information and ensuring
                     the accurate and timely reporting of financial transactions. As part of those efforts, the Executive
                     Office will continuously focus on enhancing the service orientation and client focus of its
                     administrative support.
        27.80        The proposed regular budget resources for 2020 amount to $1,613,900 and reflect a decrease of
                     $42,700 compared to the appropriation for 2019. Additional details are reflected in table 27.17 and
                     figures 27.XII and 27.XIII.

Figure 27.XII
Resources for programme support as a percentage of the regular budget
(Millions of United States dollars)




        1.3                                        1.7      Approved                     1.6       Proposed      16.3
                     Expenditure           16.4    9%
                                                                                16.2
        7%                                                    2019              91%      9%          2020        91%
                        2018               93%




                       Programme support                     Other components




19-03801                                                                                                             39/42
Part VI                  Human rights and humanitarian affairs

Table 27.17
Programme support costs: evolution of financial and post resources
(Thousands of United States dollars/number of posts)


                                                                                                      Changes                                                          2020
                                                                                                                                                                   estimates
                                               2018            2019          Technical     New/expanded           Other                   Percentage                 (before
                                        expenditures   appropriation       adjustments         mandates         changes           Total       change              recosting)


Financial resources by main category of expenditure
Post                                         942.6             890.5                   –             –                 –              –                 –                890.5
Non-post                                     314.7             766.1                   –             –           (42.7)         (42.7)            (5.6)                  723.4

     Total                                 1 257.3          1 656.6                    –             –           (42.7)         (42.7)            (2.6)              1 613.9

Posts resources by category
Professional and higher                                              3                 –             –                 –              –                 –                   3
General Service and related                                          4                 –             –                 –              –                 –                   4

     Total                                                           7                 –             –                 –              –                 –                   7


Figure 27.XIII
Programme support: distribution of proposed resources for 2020 (before recosting)
(Number of posts/thousands of United States dollars)


               Distribution of posts          Distribution of financial resources                         Distribution of non-post financial resources
                      7 posts                              $1 613.9                                                          $723.4


                                                                                             257.8                                         Other staff costs
             P-5     1

                                                                                             6.7                                           Hospitality and related costs

             P-3     1
                                                                                             2.6                                           Travel on official business


                                                                                             65.1                                          Contractual services
             P-2     1                          Post                        Non-post
                                               890.5                         723.4
                                                                                             243.1                                         General operating expenses


  Principal level    1                                                                       7.2                                           Supplies and materials


                                                                                             49.3                                          Furniture and equipment

    Other levels     3                                                                                                                     Fellowships, grants and
                                                                                             91.6
                                                                                                                                                contributions




           27.81         The variance of $42,700 reflects:
                         Other changes. The decrease is due to the re-engineering of processes in relation to the agreement
                         of the Office with the United Nations Logistics Base at Brindisi, Italy, with an aim to streamline and
                         improve services, such as leasing of laptop computers from the Offic e of Information and
                         Communications Technology as an alternative to maintaining an inventory and managing
                         configuration and the 2019 integration by the Office of its wide area network into the Global Service
                         Centre using United Nations standards, allowing it to remove a previous firewall subscription.
           27.82         Extrabudgetary resources estimated at $23,357,700 would provide for 70 posts, as reflected in
                         table 27.6. The resources would provide for the implementation of various operational requirements.
                         The increase of $458,000 compared with the estimates for 2019 reflects the anticipated level of
                         contribution expected in 2020.




40/42                                                                                                                                                                19-03801
Section 27             Humanitarian assistance

Annex I
                       Organizational structure and post distribution 2020
                                                                                                                 Office of the Under-Secretary-
                                                                                                                General for Humanitarian Affairs
                                                                                                               and Emergency Relief Coordinator
                                        United Nations                Office of the
             Secretariat of                                                                                                                                       Strategic planning, guidance
                                         Monitoring                     Assistant                              RB                    XB
      International Strategy for                                   Secretary-General                                                                                     and evaluation
                                       Mechanism for the                                                       1 USG                 1 P-4
         Disaster Reduction                                         for Humanitarian
                                         Syrian Arab                                                           1 P-5                 1 P-3
          (subprogramme 3)                                         Partnerships with                                                                                RB        XB
                                           Republic                                                            1 P-3                 3 GS (OL)
                                                                  the Middle East and                                                                               2 P-5     5 P-4
                                          RB (GTA)                    Central Asia                             2 GS (OL)
            RB      XB                                                                                                                                                        3 P-3
                                            1 D-1                         XB
           1 D-1    1 ASG                                                                                                                                                     1 GS (OL)
                                             3 P-4                       1 P-4
                    1 D-2
                                             5 P-3                     1 GS (OL)
                    3 D-1
                                             3 P-2
                    11 P-5
                                            3 NPO                                                                                                                   Organizational
                    25 P-4
                                            9 LL                                                      Office of the Assistant Secretary-General/                     development
                    30 P-3
                                                                                                       Deputy Emergency Relief Coordinator                                 XB
                    1 GS (PL)
                                                                                                                                                                         1 P-5
                    31 GS (OL)
                                                                                                    RB                       XB                                          2 P-4
                    5 NPO                                                                           1 ASG                    1 P-4



                                                                                                                                                                   Gender Unit
                                                                                                                                                                       XB
                                                                                                                                                                      1 P-5




             Policy (subprogramme                          Operations and advocacy                  Coordination                             Information management
                       1)                                    (subprogramme 2)                    (subprogramme 4)                               (subprogramme 5)a
           RB         XB                                                                                                                     RB            XB
           1 D-1      4 P-5                                RB          XB                     RB          XB                                1 D-1
           1 P-4      10 P-4                               1 D-2       1 D-1                  1 D-2       2 D-1                             1 P-5          1 D-1
           1 P-3      5 P-3                                4 P-5       8 P-5                  1 D-1       8 P-5                             3 P-4          4 P-5
                      3 GS (OL)                            8 P-4       13 P-4                 2 P-5       26 P-4                            2 P-3          19 P-4
                                                           4 P-3       14 P-3                 3 P-4       19 P-3                            3 GS (OL)      26 P-3
                                                           2 P-2       5 GS (OL)              5 P-3       25 GS (OL)                                       1 P-2
                                                           4 GS (OL)                          2 P-2                                                        17 GS (OL)
                                                                                              1 GS (PL)
                                                                                              1 GD (OL)




                               Executive office
                                                               Regional, Field and Disaster                      Humanitarian Financing and
                             (programme support)
                                                                Response Adviser Offices                           Resource Mobilization
                                                                  (subprogramme 2)
                          RB           XB                                                                           (subprogramme 2)
                          1 P-5        1 D-1                              XB
                          1 P-3        2 P-5                            21 D-1                                  RB                   XB
                          1 P-2        13 P-4                           52 P-5                                  1 D-2                2 D-1
                                                                        149 P-4                                 1 P-4                6 P-5
                          1 GS (PL)    20 P-3
                                                                        174 P-3
                          3 GS (OL)    34 GS (OL)                       29 P-2                                  1 GS (OL)            22 P-4
                                                                     611 GS (OL)                                                     33 P-3
                                                                       449 NPO                                                       1 P-2
                                                                  Subprogramme 4 XB                                                  25 GS (OL)
                                                                         4 P-4
                                                                         2 P-3




Abbreviations: ASG, Assistant Secretary-General; GS (OL), General Service (Other level); GS (PL), General Service (Principal level);
    GTA, general temporary assistance; LL, local level; NPO, National Professional Officer; RB, regular budget; USG, Under-Secretary-
    General; XB, extrabudgetary.
  a
    The Strategic Communications Branch is presented under subprogramme 5 but reports under executive direction and management.




19-03801                                                                                                                                                                                  41/42
Part VI         Human rights and humanitarian affairs

Annex II
                Summary of proposed changes in established posts by component
                and subprogramme
                          Posts Level     Description                                                   Reason for change


Executive direction and    (2) D-2        Redeployment of 1 Director of Programme Management to         Optimization of the
management                                Coordination of humanitarian action and emergency response    management structure
                                          and 1 Director of Humanitarian Affairs to Emergency support   of the Office
                                          services
                             1 P-5        Redeployment of 1 Senior Humanitarian Affairs officer from
                                          Policy and analysis
                           (2) GS (OL)    Redeployment of 1 Staff Assistant to Coordination of
                                          humanitarian action and emergency response and 1 Staff
                                          Assistant to Emergency support services
Subprogramme 1             (1) P-5        Redeployment of 1 Senior Humanitarian Affairs officer to
Policy and analysis                       executive direction and management

Subprogramme 2               1 D-2        Redeployment of 1 Director of Programme Management
Coordination of                           from executive direction and management, with a change of
humanitarian action and                   duty station from New York to Geneva
emergency response         (1) P-5        Redeployment of 1 Senior Humanitarian Affairs Officer to
                                          Emergency support services
                           (1) P-4        Redeployment of 1 Humanitarian Affairs Officer to
                                          Emergency support services
                           (3) P-3        Redeployment of 3 Humanitarian Affair Officers to
                                          Emergency support services
                             1 GS (OL)    Redeployment of 1 Staff Assistant from executive direction
                                          and management, with a change of duty station from New
                                          York to Geneva
Subprogramme 4               1 D-2        Redeployment of 1 Director of Humanitarian Affairs from
Emergency support                         executive direction and management
services
                             1 P-5        Redeployment of 1 Senior Humanitarian Affairs Officer
                                          from Coordination of humanitarian action and emergency
                                          response
                             1 P-4        Redeployment of 1 Humanitarian Affairs Officer from
                                          Coordination of humanitarian action and emergency response
                             3 P-3        Redeployment of 3 Humanitarian Affairs Officers from
                                          Coordination of humanitarian action and emergency response
                             1 GS (OL)    Redeployment of 1 Staff Assistant from executive direction
                                          and management

   Total                     –

Abbreviation: GS (OL), General Service (Other level).




42/42                                                                                                                       19-03801
