[Extract: chapter on Programme 23, Humanitarian assistance, from A/74/16 (Report of the Committee for Programme and Coordination). Lines 3565-3699 of the full pdftotext -layout output; the rest of the report is not reproduced.]

          Programme 23
          Humanitarian assistance

          384. At its 17th meeting, on 13 June, the Committee considered the proposed
          programme plan for 2020 and programme performance information for 2018 of
          programme 23, Humanitarian assistance (A/74/6 (Sect. 27)). The Committee also had



66/105                                                                                               19-11590
                                                                                                      A/74/16

           before it a note by the Secretariat on the review of the proposed programme plan by
           sectoral, functional and regional bodies (E/AC.51/2019/CRP.1/Rev.2).
           385. The representative of the Secretary-General introduced the programme and,
           together with other representatives, responded to queries raised its consideration by
           the Committee.

           Discussion
           386. Delegations expressed appreciation and support for the work carried out by the
           Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs in coordinating and providing
           protection and life-saving assistance to the millions of people displaced by conflict,
           natural disasters and other causes. It was noted that the Office played an indispensable
           role in ensuring that humanitarian aid reached those most in need in a principled,
           timely, coherent and coordinated manner.
           387. Delegations expressed broad support for the proposed programme plan, which
           was described by a delegation as “uncontroversial” and strongly grounded in the
           mandate of the Office. Delegations underlined the importance of focusing on the most
           vulnerable, including women and children, as well as persons with disabilities.
           388. A delegation expressed appreciation for the efforts outlined in the programme
           to implement the vision of the Secretary-General for reforming the United Nations
           and applauded the Office for its efforts to optimize its management structure to make
           it more transparent and accountable and to streamline its management processes and
           achieve greater operational efficiency by decentralizing decision -making and
           administrative services.
           389. With regard to funding, a delegation noted that of the $25 billion required for
           humanitarian assistance, only $15 billion had been raised and, in view of that
           shortfall, enquired whether the Office could achieve its mandates and the objectives
           of its subprogrammes. In the light of the fact that humanitarian assistance to countries
           was not provided on a long-term basis, a delegation enquired about the Office’s
           strategies with States and development partners to implement and bolster support in
           post-crisis situations. The delegation enquired how the Office intended to support the
           implementation of Sustainable Development Goal 4 (ensure inclusive and equitable
           quality education and promote lifelong learning opportunities for all), which in its
           view was critical in preventing post-crisis instability.
           390. With regard to subprogramme 1, Policy and analysis, a delegation observed that
           the references to hunger and conflict were not part of the mandate of the Office and
           questioned why those elements had been highlighted as a main result in 2018. In that
           regard, the delegation suggested the removal of the section related to armed conflict
           and food insecurity. Another delegation observed that it was expected that the
           subprogramme would have focused on policy and analysis; however, the info rmation
           presented focused instead on humanitarian responses. The delegation also observed
           that there was no reference in the highlighted result in 2018 to the mandate of
           increased attention to conflict-induced food insecurity. In that regard, it sought
           clarification on the placement of that highlighted result under subprogramme 1. A
           delegation enquired about the extent of the Office’s plans to engage with other
           development actors such as the World Bank, which was highlighted as a planned
           result for 2020, to contribute to making progress in bridging the gap between
           humanitarian and development assistance at the global level. Clarification was sought
           regarding the legislative body that considered the report of the Secretary -General,
           which detailed the response of the United Nations, humanitarian and development
           actors to famine in parts of Unity State, South Sudan, and to the risk of famine in
           north-east Nigeria, Somalia, South Sudan and Yemen in 2017 referenced in the
           highlighted result in 2018.

19-11590                                                                                              67/105
A/74/16

          391. With regard to subprogramme 2, Coordination of humanitarian action and
          emergency response, a delegation commented that the highlighted planned result for
          2020 under the subprogramme focused on funding for early action, whereas the
          overall strategy of the programme focused on dealing with long-lasting crises. The
          delegation was of the view that in planning the highlighted result, it would have been
          better to have a focus on the larger problem of long-lasting crises rather than a focused
          challenge on early action, which covered only a small part of humanitarian needs.
          That approach, the delegation stated, illustrated the limitations of having one
          highlighted result that did not allow an overview of the programme as a whole.
          392. Another delegation enquired about the introduction of a new approach in the use
          of funds from the Central Emergency Response Fund, the objective of which was to
          provide funding for life-saving assistance. It stressed that while it was in favour of
          anticipatory funding, it had concerns about the reference to formalizing the new
          approach, which had not yet been agreed upon by Member States. In that regard, the
          delegation questioned why the new approach had not been presented to the Economic
          and Social Council for consideration. Another delegation expressed the view that the
          anticipatory approach in the Central Emergency Response Fund was part of the
          mandate of the Office.
          393. With regard to subprogramme 3, Natural disaster risk reduction, a delegation
          was encouraged by the efforts of the programme in supporting countries in
          implementing the Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction 2015–2030, in
          particular target (e), which was related to increasing the number of countries with
          national and local disaster risk reduction strategies by 2020. The d elegation observed
          that in the section entitled “Result and evidence” under the heading “Highlighted
          planned result for 2020”, the number of countries expected to develop/improve
          national and local disaster risk reduction strategies would rise to 120, whic h was a
          huge leap from the 77 that were planned for 2019. In that regard, the delegation
          enquired about the Office’s strategy to reach that target. Another delegation sought
          clarification on how the Office would further leverage efforts in disaster risk
          reduction in cooperation with regional bodies and other stakeholders to prevent
          weather-related shocks from developing into humanitarian disasters.
          394. Delegations expressed support for Sustainable Development Goal 3 (ensure
          healthy lives and promote well-being for all at all ages). In expressing support for
          access to health care that promoted optimal health outcomes throughout the lifespan,
          a delegation, however, specified that his Government did not support the application
          of target 3.7 (ensure universal access to sexual and reproductive health-care services,
          including for family planning, information and education, and the integration of
          reproductive health into national strategies and programmes), as it related to abortion,
          comprehensive sex education and a diminished role of the family, and target 3.8
          (achieve universal health coverage, including financial risk protection, access to
          quality essential health-care services and access to safe, effective, quality and
          affordable essential medicines and vaccines for all), as it related to any efforts to
          include abortion as an essential humanitarian assistance service. A number of
          delegations expressed support for all services towards the achievement of targets 3.7
          and 3.8.
          395. Several delegations expressed concern in relation to the new format of the
          report. A delegation was of the view that the previous format was more
          understandable, comprehensive and substantive. It noted that in the new format, a
          considerable amount of text was taken up by excerpts from the report of the Secretary-
          General as well as humanitarian bulletins of the Office and contained hardly any
          country-specific issues related to activities of the subprogrammes. The delegation
          expressed concern about the use of terminology on which no agreeme nt had been
          reached. In that regard, it emphasized that the wording of the proposed programme

68/105                                                                                                19-11590
                                                                                                       A/74/16

           plan must be based on resolutions of the General Assembly and the Economic and
           Social Council, specifically, Assembly resolutions 73/139, 72/218 and 72/131 and
           Council resolution 2018/11.
           396. A delegation acknowledged the work by the Office in Zimbabwe and Malawi
           following the destruction resulting from Cyclone Idai. Regarding regional
           preparedness for early warning, the delegation enquired about the efforts of the Office
           to enhance the capacity of the region to respond better, noting that without funding,
           response mechanisms would be inoperable.
