                United Nations                                                                                                                A/75/6 (Sect. 27)
                General Assembly                                                                                   Distr.: General
                                                                                                                   17 April 2020

                                                                                                                   Original: English




Seventy-fifth session
Items 141 and 142 of the preliminary list*
Proposed programme budget for 2021
Programme planning


                Proposed programme budget for 2021
                Part VI
                Humanitarian assistance

                Section 27
                Humanitarian assistance
                Programme 23
                Humanitarian assistance


Contents
                                                                                                                                                                     Page

                Foreword . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     3
                A.     Proposed programme plan for 2021 and programme performance for 2019** . . . . . . . . .                                                         4
                B.     Proposed post and non-post resource requirements for 2021*** . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .                                           36
                       Annexes
                        I.    Organizational structure and post distribution for 2021 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .                                 52
                      II.     Summary of follow-up action taken to implement relevant recommendations of the
                              oversight bodies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        53




            * A/75/50.
           ** In keeping with paragraph 11 of resolution 72/266 A, the part consisting of the programme plan
              and programme performance information is submitted through the Committee for Programme and
              Coordination for the consideration of the General Assembly.
          *** In keeping with paragraph 11 of resolution 72/266 A, the part consisting of the post and non-post
              resource requirements is submitted through the Advisory Committee on Administrative and
              Budgetary Questions for the consideration of the General Assembly.


 20-05776 (E)        130520
 *2005776*
Foreword
      While the collective efforts of Member States and the humanitarian system to respond to and reduce disaster
risks are improving and becoming faster, global humanitarian needs and disaster impacts continue to grow. In 2020,
nearly 168 million people – 1 person in 45 – will need humanitarian assistance and protection. This is a substantial
increase from 2019, when 132 million needed assistance, and is a trend that will likely continue in 2021. The
unprecedented levels of humanitarian need are driven mainly by protracted crises and intensifying conflicts,
extreme weather events associated with climate change, underperforming economies and outbreaks of infectious
disease. These complex challenges are increasing the vulnerability of people, while reducing their ability to cope.
     At the same time, the humanitarian system is more effective, innovative and inclusive in targeting help to
those who need it most and in reaching them quickly with priority assistance. Response plans better address the
needs of women, girls, people with disabilities and other vulnerable people, and effort s are made to deal with the
physical and mental health of those in need.
      The global humanitarian community has improved its planning, forecasting and analysis of humanitarian
crises. Generous support continues to be provided for disaster response, with Me mber States and others providing
$16 billion in 2019 to United Nations-coordinated appeals and aiming to reach 109 million people by the end of
2020. The growing challenges and needs, however, mean that we must continue to get ahead of crises by
strengthening anticipatory approaches and early action rather than waiting for disasters to escalate. Advances in
data and predictive analytics enable more accurate forecasting of predictable shocks or crises, such as droughts and
disease outbreaks. This evidence has supported Member States and the humanitarian community in introducing
innovative financing approaches to improve response.
     Humanitarian response alone will not address chronic challenges or mitigate their effects. More collaboration
is needed to address these challenges and build the resilience of people who are at risk. The continued
implementation of the reform efforts of the Secretary-General will serve to strengthen the effectiveness, cohesion,
accountability and capacities to better support Member States and assist countries in implementing the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development.

                                                                                        (Signed) Mark Lowcock
                                                                Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs
                                                                              and Emergency Relief Coordinator




20-05776                                                                                                        3/53
Part VI          Humanitarian assistance

           A. Proposed programme plan for 2021 and programme
              performance for 2019
                 Overall orientation
                 Mandates and background

          27.1   The Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs derives its mandate from General Assembly
                 resolution 46/182, in which the Assembly set out the guiding principles of humanitarian response
                 and affirmed the leadership role of the Secretary-General to ensure better preparation and effective
                 response to natural disasters and other emergencies. The Assembly also established the role of the
                 Emergency Relief Coordinator, who works with the Secretary -General and the Inter-Agency
                 Standing Committee to ensure better preparation for and a coordinated, timely, principled and
                 coherent response to natural disasters and complex emergencies by the international community.
                 This mandate has been confirmed and consolidated through the normative developments of various
                 resolutions over the past 25 years.
          27.2   The mandate of the United Nations Office for Disaster Risk Reduction derives from the priorities
                 established in relevant resolutions of the General Assembly, most notably 56/195, as well as the
                 Sendai Declaration and the Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction 2015 –2030. The Office,
                 which is the focal point in the United Nations system for the coordination of d isaster risk reduction,
                 is responsible for leading and ensuring synergies between the disaster reduction activities of the
                 United Nations system and regional organizations and activities conducted to promote
                 socioeconomic development and humanitarian response.
          27.3   For the past five years, disasters have been affecting an average of 350 million people annually and
                 causing billions of dollars in damages. Extreme weather events have become more frequent and more
                 severe in the past 20 years, resulting in tragic human and escalating economic losses. Global trends
                 such as poverty, inequality, population growth, conflict, climate change and pandemics continue to
                 erode people’s resilience, making them susceptible to a wide range of shocks and hazards. Armed
                 conflict was one of the main drivers of humanitarian needs. Across many conflicts, lack of respect
                 for international humanitarian law has become a major concern. Attacks directed against or
                 indiscriminately harming civilians and civilian infrastructure lead to d eath, injury, illness, hunger
                 and displacement. These crises exacerbate situations of vulnerability, mostly of women, children,
                 older persons, people with disabilities, the marginalized and the poor. A number of crises became
                 protracted in nature, with the average humanitarian crisis lasting more than nine years. These
                 situations cannot be resolved through short-term approaches or by humanitarian action alone.
          27.4   These trends suggest that humanitarian needs will continue to remain high in 2021, which cal ls for
                 strengthened preparedness planning and response coordination support to Member States.
          27.5   With humanitarian crises affecting more people than ever, even with record levels of funding, the
                 gap between humanitarian needs and resource requirements continues to grow.
          27.6   Since 2015, appeals for crises lasting five years or longer have spiked and now account for more
                 than 80 per cent of the humanitarian funding received and requested. The humanitarian system needs
                 to become even faster and more effective by managing risks and reducing vulnerability instead of
                 waiting to respond until crises cause immense suffering.


                 Strategy and external factors for 2021

          27.7   To fulfil its mandate, the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs will co ntinue to support
                 Member States in coordinating effective and principled humanitarian action in partnership with
                 national and international actors, in order to alleviate human suffering in disasters and complex
                 emergencies; advocate the rights of people in need; promote preparedness and prevention; and
                 facilitate sustainable solutions. To meet these challenges, the Office will support Member States and

4/53                                                                                                              20-05776
Section 27        Humanitarian assistance

                  humanitarian partners in better responding to disasters and complex emergencies and help to mitigate
                  shocks before they escalate into humanitarian crises. This will be informed by the evidence -based
                  assessment and analysis of humanitarian trends and needs. In a changing world and evolving
                  humanitarian sector, such responses benefit from strong partnerships. Co nsidering that humanitarian
                  crises can impede or reverse development gains, the Office will ensure that humanitarian assistance
                  is provided in ways that are supportive of recovery and longer-term sustainable development. The
                  Office will collaborate with development actors to increase the coherence and complementarity of
                  the assistance provided and ensure that humanitarian assistance helps to strengthen resilience. The
                  Office, with other humanitarian partners, assists Members States in reducing vulnerabiliti es,
                  rebuilding livelihoods and increasing resilience.
           27.8   The United Nations Office for Disaster Risk Reduction will pursue the substantial reduction in
                  disaster risks and losses through the prevention of new disaster risks and the reduction in existing
                  ones, as well as by strengthening resilience through multi-hazard disaster risk management.
                  Humanitarian response and development must become more risk -informed. Reducing disaster risk
                  and building resilience benefits from close collaboration between huma nitarian and development
                  actors. In line with its strategic framework for the period 2016 –2021, the Office will monitor and
                  review progress achieved in the implementation of the Sendai Framework and improve
                  understanding of risks at all levels. The Office will provide policy guidance and decision-making
                  tools to reduce disaster risks, including through the production and dissemination of risk knowledge
                  and information. It will also work to catalyse action of decision -makers and leverage partnerships
                  among the United Nations system, international and regional organizations, civil society, the private
                  sector and other stakeholders to accelerate the implementation of the Sendai Framework. It will
                  continue to ensure overall policy coherence by engaging with Memb er States, contributing to
                  relevant intergovernmental processes and establishing and guiding regional and national
                  coordination mechanisms to accelerate compliance with the Sendai Framework and related targets
                  of the Sustainable Development Goals. It will also continue to build the capacity of counterparts and
                  leverage new partnerships and financing models to increase financing for disaster risk reduction and
                  risk-sensitive investment.
           27.9   With regard to the external factors, the overall plan for 2021 is based on the following assumptions:
                  (a)   Humanitarian needs and funding requirements will remain high in 2021;
                  (b)   The majority of humanitarian needs will continue to occur in protracted crises, which are often
                        the product of interactions between natural hazards, armed conflict and human vulnerability.
                        These will require complex and even faster responses, and closer collaboration between the
                        humanitarian system and development actors;
                  (c)   Disasters will continue to increase in frequency and magnitude.
       27.10      The Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs integrates a gender perspective in its
                  activities, deliverables and results, as appropriate. The Office ensures that a gender perspective is
                  fully integrated into its activities through its own and in ter-agency policies and tools, such as the
                  Inter-Agency Standing Committee policy on gender equality and the empowerment of women and
                  girls in humanitarian action, its Gender Handbook in Humanitarian Action and its Gender Standby
                  Capacity project roster and advisers.
       27.11      With regard to cooperation with other entities, the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
                  Affairs will continue to work with national and local governments, affected communities, the
                  Inter-Agency Standing Committee and other stakeholders, including regional disaster management
                  and response organizations, other regional and subregional organizations, private sector
                  organizations, first responders and academia, to promote principled and effect ive humanitarian
                  response.
       27.12      With regard to inter-agency coordination and liaison, the Office for the Coordination of
                  Humanitarian Affairs will continue, through the Inter-Agency Standing Committee and its subsidiary
                  bodies, to coordinate the development of guidance for the humanitarian response system. It will


20-05776                                                                                                            5/53
Part VI          Humanitarian assistance

                 provide and manage global platforms, such as the United Nations Disaster Assessment and
                 Coordination Team mechanism and the International Search and Rescue Advisory Group, to pool
                 resources and facilitate a joint response to humanitarian crises. The Office for the Coordination of
                 Humanitarian Affairs coordinates with and seeks input from the Department of Peace Operations,
                 the Department of Political and Peacebuilding Affairs, the Office of the U nited Nations High
                 Commissioner for Human Rights and relevant United Nations agencies in crisis situations. With
                 regard to resilience and the capacity-building of humanitarian leaders, the Office for the
                 Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs collaborates closely with the Development Coordination
                 Office and other United Nations agencies. At the country level, the Office for the Coordination of
                 Humanitarian Affairs coordinates with and supports United Nations agencies, such as the World
                 Food Programme, the United Nations Development Programme, the United Nations Children’s Fund,
                 the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, the World Health Organization, the
                 Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and the United Nations Popula tion
                 Fund (UNFPA) throughout the humanitarian programme cycle to ensure coherent, effective and
                 consistent system-wide response strategies that meet the needs of affected people and that minimize
                 the duplication and gaps in response efforts.


                 Legislative mandates

         27.13   The list below provides all mandates entrusted to the programme.

General Assembly resolutions
46/182             Strengthening of the coordination of            69/313        Addis Ababa Action Agenda of the Third
                   humanitarian emergency assistance of the                      International Conference on Financing for
                   United Nations                                                Development (Addis Ababa Action Agenda)
47/120 A and B     An Agenda for Peace: preventive                 70/1          Transforming our world: the 2030 Agenda
                   diplomacy and related matters                                 for Sustainable Development
52/12              Renewing the United Nations: a programme        71/243        Quadrennial comprehensive policy review
                   for reform                                                    of operational activities for development of
52/167             Safety and security of humanitarian personnel                 the United Nations system

60/1               2005 World Summit Outcome                       74/115        International cooperation on humanitarian
                                                                                 assistance in the field of natural disasters,
62/208             Triennial comprehensive policy review of                      from relief to development
                   operational activities for development of
                   the United Nations system                       74/116        Safety and security of humanitarian
                                                                                 personnel and protection of United Nations
67/226             Quadrennial comprehensive policy review                       personnel
                   of operational activities for development of
                   the United Nations system                       74/118        Strengthening of the coordination of
                                                                                 emergency humanitarian assistance of the
68/1               Review of the implementation of General                       United Nations
                   Assembly resolution 61/16 on the
                   strengthening of the Economic and Social        74/160        Protection of and assistance to internally
                   Council                                                       displaced

Economic and Social Council resolution
2019/14            Strengthening of the coordination of
                   emergency humanitarian assistance of the
                   United Nations

Security Council resolutions
1894 (2009)        Protection of civilians in armed conflict       2470 (2019)   Extension of the mandate of the United
2222 (2015)        Protection of civilians in armed conflict                     Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq
                   (protection of journalists)                     2472 (2019)   Extension of the authorization to member
2286 (2016)        Health care workers and facilities in armed                   States of the African Union to maintain the
                   conflict                                                      deployment of the African Union Mission
                                                                                 in Somalia
2417 (2018)        Armed conflict and food insecurity

6/53                                                                                                                     20-05776
Section 27        Humanitarian assistance


2474 (2019)           Protection of civilians in armed conflict                        Stabilization Mission in the Central African
                      (missing persons in armed conflict)                              Republic
2475 (2019)           Protection of civilians in armed conflict         2502 (2019)    Extension of the mandate of the United
                      (protection of persons with disabilities in                      Nations Organization Stabilization Mission
                      armed conflict)                                                  in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
2480 (2019)           Extension of the mandate of the United            2504 (2020)    Renewing and amending the authorization for
                      Nations Multidimensional Integrated                              the cross-border delivery of humanitarian
                      Stabilization Mission in Mali                                    assistance in the Syrian Arab Republic
2486 (2019)           Extension of the mandate of the United            2514 (2020)    Extension of the mandate of the United
                      Nations Support Mission in Libya                                 Nations Mission in South Sudan
2489 (2019)           Extension of the mandate of the United            2516 (2020)    Extension of the mandate of the United
                      Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan                        Nations Assistance Mission in Somalia
2497 (2019)           Extension of the mandate of the United            2517 (2020)    Extension of the mandate of the African
                      Nations Interim Security Force for Abyei                         Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
                                                                                       Darfur
2499 (2019)           Extension of the mandate of the United
                      Nations Multidimensional Integrated


                  Deliverables

        27.14     Table 27.1 lists all cross-cutting deliverables, by category and subcategory, for the period
                  2019–2021.

Table 27.1
Cross-cutting deliverables for the period 2019–2021, by category and subcategory

                                                                                             2019       2019        2020        2021
Category and subcategory                                                                  planned      actual    planned     planned


A. Facilitation of the intergovernmental process and expert bodies
    Parliamentary documentation (number of documents)                                           4          4           4          4
    1. Report on the implementation of the Sendai Framework                                     1          1           1          1
    2. Report on protection of civilians                                                        1          1           1          1
    3. Report on natural disasters                                                              1          1           1          1
    4. Report on the Central Emergency Response Fund                                            1          1           1          1
    Substantive services for meetings (number of three-hour meetings)                           6          6           6          6
    5. Meetings of the Fifth Committee                                                          1          1           1          1
    6. Meetings of the Committee for Programme and Coordination                                 1          1           1          1
    7. Meetings of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions             1          1           1          1
    8. Meetings of the Third Committee                                                          1          1           1          1
    9. Meetings of the Economic and Social Council humanitarian affairs segment                 1          1           1          1
    10. Meetings of the Expert Group on the Protection of Civilians                             1          1           1          1
    Conference and secretariat service for meetings (number of three-hour meetings)             4          4           4          4
    11. General Assembly plenary (Second Committee), agenda items on sustainable
        development                                                                             1          1           1          1
    12. High-level meetings and events on the provision of international assistance             3          3           3          3
B. Generation and transfer of knowledge
    Field and technical cooperation projects (number of projects)                              36         34         34          34
    13. National and regional projects on the implementation of the Sendai Framework           29         29         29          29
    14. Capacity-building projects on response                                                  6          4           4          4
    15. Projects on interoperability of response tools and procedures                           1          1           1          1



20-05776                                                                                                                        7/53
Part VI           Humanitarian assistance


                                                                                              2019      2019        2020       2021
Category and subcategory                                                                   planned     actual    planned    planned


    Publications (number of publications)                                                       3          3          3             3
    16. Global Assessment Report on Disaster Risk Reduction                                     1          1          1             1
    17. Annual disaster risk reduction report                                                   1          1          1             1
    18. Plan of action on disaster risk reduction for resilience progress report                1          1          1             1
    Technical materials (number of materials)                                                  12         20         12           15
    19. Policy guidance on risk knowledge and humanitarian assistance                           2          3          1             2
    20. Outcome documents of the regional and global platforms                                  1          1          5             3
    21. Policy research papers, best practices, standards and guidance                          9         16          6           10
C. Substantive deliverables
    Consultation, advice and advocacy: regional, subregional, national and local strategies and plans; national contingency
    planning and disaster preparedness; risk governance capacities of local and urban bodies; and intergovernmental processes to
    advance the implementation of the Sendai Framework and to support policy coherence on disaster risk reduction across sectors,
    such as the Conference of States Parties to the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities, the multi -stakeholder
    forum on science, technology and innovation for the Sustainable Development Goals.
    Humanitarian assistance missions: 3–5 civil-military coordination support missions (upon request) annually; 3 -10 United
    Nations Disaster Assessment and Coordination Team missions annually (subject to occurrence of disasters and at the requests of
    disaster-affected Governments or humanitarian country teams); provision of humanitarian coordination support for emergency
    core relief; and provision of support.
    Databases and substantive digital materials: Sendai Framework monitor; first iteration of global risk assessment framework;
    and disaster loss databases.
D. Communication deliverables
    Outreach programmes, special events and information materials: campaigns and information materials to drive positive
    change; annual partnership and outreach event to facilitate collaboration amon g humanitarian responders; approximately 3–5
    norms/guidance/tools on emergency response services annually; global and regional platforms and high-level meetings on
    disaster risk reduction.
    External and media relations: proactive external and media relations; high-level advocacy of the Special Representative of the
    Secretary-General for Disaster Risk Reduction through press releases, and op -eds and press coverage.



                  Evaluation activities

        27.15     The following evaluations completed in 2019 have guided the programme plan for 2021:
                  (a)      Evaluation of the country-based pooled funds;
                  (b)      Inter-agency humanitarian evaluation of the Ethiopia drought response;
                  (c)      Office of Internal Oversight Services triennial review of the Office for the Coordination of
                           Humanitarian Affairs (focusing on follow-up to the 2017 evaluation of the Office on advocacy).
        27.16     The findings of the evaluations referenced in paragraph 27.1 5 above have been considered for the
                  programme plan for 2021. The country-based pooled funds evaluation highlighted the importance of
                  coherent resource mobilization strategies and guidance on the promotion of good practice in the use
                  and management of funding, while the Ethiopia drought response evaluation found that, in its well -
                  coordinated efforts, supported by strong government leadership, the collective humanitarian drought
                  response in Ethiopia saved many lives. Areas identified for strengthening includ e early action,
                  resilience support and accountability to affected people. The evaluation identifies lessons to improve
                  future responses to droughts in Ethiopia and similar crises.
        27.17     For 2021, an inter-agency humanitarian evaluation in Yemen is planned.




8/53                                                                                                                        20-05776
Section 27     Humanitarian assistance

               Programme of work
               Subprogramme 1
               Policy and analysis

               Objective

       27.18   The objective, to which this subprogramme contributes, is to enhance the strategic and operational
               coherence of humanitarian response.


               Strategy

       27.19   To contribute to the enhancement of the strategic coherence of humanitarian response, the
               subprogramme will identify emerging humanitarian trends and analyse challenges in and
               opportunities for advancing humanitarian action, which is expected to result in recommendations for
               improved action that address evolving challenges to the humanitarian system. Past results in this
               area include the annual reports of the Secretary-General on the strengthening of the coordination of
               emergency humanitarian assistance of the United Nations, on the protection of civilians and on
               international cooperation on humanitarian assistance in the field of natural disasters, from relief to
               development. In addition, policy papers have been developed on subjects ranging from durable
               solutions for protracted displacement to a stocktaking of 20 years of protection of civilians work at
               the Security Council. The subprogramme also tracked humanitarian trends and provided analysis
               and forecasts for the evidence-based assessment by the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
               Affairs of 2020 global humanitarian needs.
       27.20   To contribute to the enhancement of the strategic and operational coherence of humanitarian
               response, the subprogramme will also identify policy and programmatic solutio ns and best practice
               and innovative concepts that should be disseminated widely to inform and guide policy, operational
               decisions and crisis management, which are expected to result in a humanitarian system that remains
               relevant and adapted to the ever-changing humanitarian operational environment. Past results in this
               area include the minimum package of services on access of the Office for the Coordination of
               Humanitarian Affairs and evidence and lessons learned on the systemic barriers and enablers in ord er
               to work better across humanitarian, development and peace contexts.


               Programme performance in 2019 against planned result

       27.21   A planned result for 2019, which was that decisions of the Inter-Agency Standing Committee
               members and other partners are informed by humanitarian policy analysis and dialogue, as referred
               to in the proposed programme budget for the biennium 2018 –2019, was achieved, as evidenced by
               the inclusion of three humanitarian policy priorities in the report of the Secretary -General on the
               strengthening of the coordination of emergency humanitarian assistance of the United Nations that
               were discussed by Member States during the Economic and Social Council and General Assembly
               humanitarian resolution negotiations. The subprogramme sup ported Member State discussions on
               three humanitarian policy priorities during the annual humanitarian affairs segment of the Council,
               held at the Palais des Nations in Geneva from 24 to 26 June 2019. The high -level panel on “Preparing
               for the future in the face of climate change and weather-related disasters: strengthening preparedness
               and humanitarian response and collaborating to build resilience and address escalating risks and
               challenges” addressed the devastation caused by Cyclones Idai and Kenneth, w hile highlighting
               wider challenges posed by the climate crisis and extreme weather events. Discussions at the high -
               level panel on “Strengthening humanitarian action: next steps to advance localization and engage
               communities for a more inclusive and effective humanitarian response” considered the experience
               and progress to date to reinforce local systems, empower local actors and better engage crisis -
               affected communities for a more inclusive and effective humanitarian response, and key next steps.


20-05776                                                                                                         9/53
Part VI         Humanitarian assistance

                The high-level panel, titled “Towards the seventieth anniversary of the Geneva Conventions of
                12 August 1949: achieving collective commitment to international humanitarian law and putting
                fundamental protections into practice,” highlighted the importance of the Conv entions, examples of
                good practice and what more could be done to improve implementation of the Conventions for the
                protection for civilians in armed conflict.


                Programme performance in 2019: humanitarian
                access strengthened

        27.22   The subprogramme developed the minimum package of services on access and provided field
                support and guidance on access issues. Humanitarian access, in line with General Assembly
                resolution 46/182, enables humanitarian actors to reach populations in need and for affected
                populations to have access to assistance and services. Full and unimpeded humanitarian access is a
                fundamental prerequisite to effective humanitarian action. The minimum package pr ovided
                operational guidance, encouraging a more systematic and predictable approach to humanitarian
                access by humanitarian actors. In addition, the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
                conducted good practice and lessons learned exercises an d supported the development of strategies
                to overcome access constraints in relevant operations. Additional support and guidance on access
                was provided through webinars, regular policy notes and field support missions, which helped to
                maintain a regular community of access practitioners around the world. The subprogramme ensured
                that humanitarian actors in various countries facing access constraints were aware of key
                methodologies and could apply them flexibly in varied contexts. For example, in South Sudan , where
                millions of people in need of humanitarian assistance faced access constraints, the minimum package
                was rolled out and enabled actors to facilitate access.

                Progress towards the attainment of the objective, and performance measure
        27.23   This work contributed to an enhanced strategic and operational coherence of humanitarian response,
                as demonstrated by improved humanitarian access in South Sudan, which led to a greater number of
                people reached with life-saving assistance and protection. Although numerous contributing factors
                facilitated access to people in need, the subprogramme made a significant contribution by providing
                humanitarian actors facing access constraints with operational guidance based on an analysis of
                various country contexts, to enable them to apply a sound and common methodology in their specific
                context. By providing strategies to help to overcome access constraints, the implementation of the
                minimum package of services on access allowed for more coherence in approaches and supp orted
                the improved delivery of humanitarian assistance. By the end of 2019, humanitarian partners reached
                5.7 million people. The 2020 Humanitarian Response Plan for South Sudan advocates enhancing
                access to essential services, restoring livelihoods and promoting durable solutions to displacement
                in order to lessen the reliance on humanitarian assistance.




10/53                                                                                                       20-05776
Section 27        Humanitarian assistance

Figure 27.I
Performance measure: number of people receiving humanitarian assistance in South Sudan, 2015 –2019
(Millions)



    6.5

                                                                                 6.0
    6.0                                                     5.8
                                                                                                     5.7

    5.5
                                             5.1
    5.0


    4.5
                   4.1
    4.0
                   2015                     2016           2017                 2018                2019



                  Planned results for 2021

                  Result 1: increased collaboration between humanitarian and development
                  partners at the country-level (result carried over from 2020)
          27.24   The subprogramme will continue the work related to the collaboration between development and
                  humanitarian actors, in line with its mandate, and will promote joint planning and commonly agreed
                  strategies for increased collaboration between humanitarian and development acto rs, based on
                  lessons learned from experiences in the various country contexts, which is expected to be
                  demonstrated by the performance measure for 2021 below. For 2020, a proxy performance measure
                  is indicated, to reflect that the General Assembly, in its resolution 74/251, approved a programme
                  narrative at the subprogramme level that is composed solely of the objectives approved by the
                  General Assembly in its resolution 71/6 and the deliverables for 2020.

Figure 27.II
Performance measure: number of countries where humanitarian and development partners have defined
common strategies, 2017–2021

  160                                                                                                150

  140
                                                                                120
  120
  100                                                       90

   80
   60
   40
   20
                  N/A                       N/A
    0
                  2017                      2018           2019                 2020                2021

Abbreviation: N/A, not applicable.




20-05776                                                                                                       11/53
Part VI         Humanitarian assistance

                Result 2: how technology may shape the humanitarian operating environment
                (new result)
        27.25   In recent years, the development and use of new and emerging technologies to achieve the
                Sustainable Development Goals has been recognized as a key area of focus, which at the same time
                promote responsible innovation. In assessing the implications of new and emerging technologies for
                the humanitarian system, several themes and sub-themes warrant consideration.
        27.26   Since 2013, the subprogramme has been following different innovations to improve the strategic and
                operational coherence of humanitarian response, from humanitarianism in the network age to data
                responsibility, to 3-D printing. In 2019, the subprogramme began to review and consult on wider
                Secretariat initiatives and work done by the humanitarian community on the potential humanitarian
                opportunities and challenges and risks associated with new and emerging technologies, specifically
                as it related to the protection of civilians agenda.

                Internal challenge and response
        27.27   The challenge for the subprogramme was to develop timely humanitarian policies that
                comprehensively address diverse technological challenges and changes affecting humanitarian
                operations when so many other policy priorities have arisen ove r the year. In response, the
                subprogramme will make use of synergies with other ongoing initiatives in the United Nations
                system. The Secretary-General established the development and use of new and emerging
                technologies to achieve the Sustainable Development Goals as a key priority, which at the same time
                promote responsible innovation. To underscore these commitments, in 2018, the Secretary -General
                presented his strategy on new technologies, adopted Securing Our Common Future: An Agenda for
                Disarmament, and convened the High-level Panel on Digital Cooperation. In January 2020, the
                Secretary-General presented four challenges confronting the United Nations. The final challenge
                that he highlighted in his address to the General Assembly was “the dark side of t he digital world”.
                He cited the use of technologies to commit crimes, incite hate, spread false information, oppress and
                exploit people and invade privacy. He noted, in particular, that “Artificial intelligence is generating
                breathtaking capacities and alarming possibilities. Lethal autonomous weapons – machines with the
                power to kill on their own, without human judgement and accountability – are bringing us into
                unacceptable moral and political territory”.
        27.28   In coordination with other parts of the United Nations that are taking a renewed look at technology, the
                subprogramme will examine the opportunities and challenges posed by technology and consolidate
                thinking, draw lessons and identify best practices on how technology can be used to make humanitari an
                action more effective and efficient. By 2021, the subprogramme expects to review best practices and
                offer guidance, as well as develop policy positions on technology and humanitarian response.

                Expected progress towards the attainment of the objective, and performance measure
        27.29   This work is expected to contribute to the enhancement of the strategic and operational coherence
                of humanitarian response, which would be demonstrated by an increased use of strategic
                technologies by humanitarian actors, thereby enabling increased data protection for beneficiaries;
                early action through predictive analytics and better assessments through the use of technology; and
                increased coordination of technology-assisted information-sharing between humanitarians and with
                beneficiaries through mobile phones and the responsible use of social media.




12/53                                                                                                            20-05776
Section 27        Humanitarian assistance

Table 27.2
Performance measure

2017                          2018                        2019                  2020                           2021


N/A                           Stakeholders share          United Nations        Initiatives for                Increased use of
                              best practices on           Secretariat-wide      technology and                 strategic
                              technology and              initiatives on        innovation are                 technologies by
                              innovation to               technology and        tested in selected             humanitarian actors
                              improve efficiency          innovation            humanitarian
                              and the effectiveness                             response contexts
                              of humanitarian
                              response

Abbreviation: N/A, not applicable.


                  Legislative mandates

         27.30    The list below provides all mandates entrusted to the subprogramme.

General Assembly resolutions
56/89                 Scope of legal protection under the            73/138            White Helmets Commission: participation
                      Convention on the Safety of United Nations                       of volunteers in the activities of the United
                      and Associated Personnel                                         Nations in the field of humanitarian relief,
61/117                Applicability of the Geneva Convention                           rehabilitation and technical cooperation for
                      relative to the Protection of Civilian                           development
                      Persons in Time of War, of 12 August 1949,     73/150            Assistance to refugees, returnees and
                      to the Occupied Palestinian Territory,                           displaced persons in Africa
                      including East Jerusalem, and other            73/151            Office of the United Nations High
                      occupied Arab territories                                        Commissioner for Refugees
62/134                Eliminating rape and other forms of sexual     73/195            Global Compact for Safe, Orderly and
                      violence in all their manifestations,                            Regular Migration
                      including in conflict and related situations
                                                                     74/131            Assistance to refugees, returnees and
63/147                New international humanitarian order                             displaced persons in Africa
72/305                Review of the implementation of General        74/160            Protection of and assistance to internally
                      Assembly resolution 68/1 on the                                  displaced persons
                      strengthening of the Economic and Social
                      Council


                  Deliverables

         27.31    Table 27.3 lists all deliverables, by category and subcategory, for the period 2019 –2021 that
                  contributed and are expected to contribute to the attainment of the objective stated above.

Table 27.3
Subprogramme 1: deliverables for the period 2019–2021, by category and subcategory

                                                                                           2019        2019              2020      2021
Category and subcategory                                                                planned       actual          planned   planned


A. Facilitation of the intergovernmental process and expert bodies
    Parliamentary documentation (number of documents)                                        3            3                3         3
    1. Report of the Secretary-General on the strengthening of the coordination of
       emergency humanitarian assistance of the United Nations                               1            1                1         1


20-05776                                                                                                                         13/53
Part VI           Humanitarian assistance


                                                                                       2019     2019        2020       2021
Category and subcategory                                                            planned    actual    planned    planned


    2. Report of the Secretary-General on the protection of civilians                    1         1          1           1
    3. Report of the Secretary-General on natural disasters                              1         1          1           1
    Substantive services for meetings (number of three-hour meetings)                    6         6          6           6
    4. Meetings of the Third Committee                                                   1         1          1           1
    5. Meetings of the Expert Group on the Protection of Civilians                       4         4          4           4
    6. Meetings of the Economic and Social Council humanitarian affairs segment          1         1          1           1
B. Generation and transfer of knowledge
    Seminars, workshops and training events (number of days)                             3         3          3           3
    7. Organization of forums/workshops with academic institutions and
       non-governmental organizations to promote humanitarian assistance and to
       address humanitarian concerns                                                     3         3          3           3
    Technical materials (number of materials)                                            2         5          2           2
    8. Strategy papers, policy tools and guidance notes for humanitarian agencies
       on the relation among the political, humanitarian assistance and human
       rights dimensions of the United Nations response to crises                        1         3          1           1
    9. Studies, guidance and policy analysis on developments in the humanitarian
       sector                                                                            1         2          1           1



                  Subprogramme 2
                  Coordination of humanitarian action and emergency response

                  Objective

        27.32     The objective, to which this subprogramme contributes, is to ensure a coherent, effective and timely
                  humanitarian response to alleviate human suffering in natural disasters and complex emergencies.


                  Strategy

        27.33     To contribute to a coherent humanitarian response to alleviate human suffering in natural disasters
                  and complex emergencies, the subprogramme will facilitate a coordinated analysis of needs through
                  humanitarian needs overviews. The subprogramme will also amplify the voices of affected peopl e
                  by including them in planning and response processes. Inclusivity will also be facilitated by data
                  disaggregated by gender, age, disability and other diversity dimensions. The analysis provided in
                  humanitarian needs overviews now also defines problems affecting specific population groups,
                  subgroups and geographic areas, articulated around overarching protection issues; physical and
                  mental well-being; living standards and self-sustenance capacity; and recovery and resilience. This
                  “enhanced approach” will be further consolidated and rolled out in 2021. This work is expected to
                  result in a stronger intersectoral analysis by partners that captures chronic and structural, as well as
                  immediate, needs. Past results in these areas include a stronger prioritizatio n of the response, in line
                  with an improved analysis of needs.
        27.34     To contribute to an effective humanitarian response to alleviate human suffering in natural disasters
                  and complex emergencies, the subprogramme will seek to reduce the funding gap for h umanitarian
                  action by enhancing advocacy for system-wide resource mobilization and by reinforcing partnerships
                  with humanitarian actors, civil society and Member States. This action is expected to result in
                  sustained funding for the humanitarian system to improve the lives of people affected by crisis. Past
                  results in these areas include facilitating financial pledges from Member States for the humanitarian
                  response in Yemen, meeting 85.3 per cent of requirements in 2018 and 84 per cent of the



14/53                                                                                                               20-05776
Section 27     Humanitarian assistance

               requirements in 2019, making it among the highest funded United Nations-coordinated response
               plans over two years.
       27.35   To contribute to a timely humanitarian response to alleviate human suffering in natural disasters and
               complex emergencies, the subprogramme will more rapidly disburse financial assistance from the
               Central Emergency Relief Fund to reach humanitarian agencies. This action is expected to result in
               the availability of emergency funding as soon as possible to meet the needs of affected people. Past
               results in these areas include allocating $500.5 million in 2018 to support humanitarian action in
               48 countries and territories. Of that amount, $321 million went to kick -start and scale up emergency
               responses in 37 countries and $180 million was released to bol ster humanitarian operations in 18 of
               the world’s most underfunded crises. In 2019, $494 million was provided from the Fund to assist
               some 13 million people in 20 underfunded crises around the world.


               Programme performance in 2019 against planned result

       27.36   A planned result for 2019, which is the timely and coordinated use of the Central Emergency
               Response Fund (CERF) in countries with new and protracted emergencies, as referred to in the
               proposed programme budget for the biennium 2018–2019, was achieved in part, as evidenced by the
               improvement from 69 per cent in the biennium 2016–2017 to 82.3 per cent of project proposals under
               the rapid response window approved by the Emergency Relief Coordinator within three working
               days of their final submission, compared with the 2019 targeted amount of 95 per cent. This was due
               in part to increased guidance and engagement with requesting agencies prior to the submission of
               proposals and during the review process.


               Programme performance in 2019: increased availability of
               resources combating sexual and gender-based violence in
               humanitarian crises

       27.37   Humanitarian crises can trigger and exacerbate sexual and gender-based violence, including rape,
               sexual exploitation, trafficking, forced and early marriage, and intim ate partner violence.
               Notwithstanding the criticality of combating such violence, protection from it remains severely
               underfunded, with less than 1 per cent of all funds channelled to humanitarian assistance. While the
               humanitarian response to sexual and gender-based violence has improved in recent years, much work
               remains to be done, in particular with regard to ensuring that affected people are at the centre of the
               response.
       27.38   In order to support political will and drive change in the prevention and mitigation of and response
               to sexual and gender-based violence, the subprogramme, in partnership with the Governments of
               Iraq, Norway, Somalia and the United Arab Emirates, UNFPA and the International Committee of
               the Red Cross, hosted a high-level conference in May 2019 on ending sexual and gender-based
               violence in humanitarian crises.
       27.39   Some 50 Member States, United Nations agencies, non-governmental organizations (NGOs) and
               others submitted written political, policy and best practice commitments and outlined specific
               measures to end sexual and gender-based violence. Twenty-one donors announced $363 million in
               funding for 2019 and 2020 and beyond, including $226.2 million for 2019 alone. In addition,
               generous unearmarked and core funding to humanitarian partners working to prevent and respond to
               sexual and gender-based violence was announced. Furthermore, commitments were made regarding
               standards and legal frameworks, operational support, sexual and gender-based violence prevention
               and leadership and coordination, which are specific to country contexts and areas of work. There
               was a strong focus on addressing root causes, promoting gender equality and supporting women -led
               organizations working on sexual and gender-based violence.
       27.40   The subprogramme also addressed sexual and gender-based violence at the country level through its
               inclusion in humanitarian country team protection strategies and sexual and gender -based violence

20-05776                                                                                                         15/53
Part VI              Humanitarian assistance

                     prevention in the annual humanitarian needs overviews and humanitarian respo nse plans. Moreover,
                     the subprogramme facilitated the recruitment of protection advisers to increase protection capacity
                     in Humanitarian Coordinator offices in the Central African Republic, the Democratic Republic of
                     the Congo, Nigeria, the Sudan and Yemen.

                     Progress towards the attainment of the objective, and performance measure
          27.41      This work contributed to ensuring coherent, effective and timely humanitarian response, as
                     demonstrated by $208 million provided to NGOs, which underscores the improved access to funding
                     for national NGOs, and especially women’s organizations that work on sexual and gender-based
                     violence, through country-based pooled funds managed by the Office for the Coordination of
                     Humanitarian Affairs.

Figure 27.III
Performance measure: annual funding for country-based pooled funds provided to national non-governmental
organizations, 2015–2019
(Millions of United States dollars)


   250
                                                                                    209                 208
   200
                                                               163
   150                                         130

   100
                       71

     50

      0
                      2015                     2016            2017                2018                 2019



                     Planned results for 2021

                     Result 1: increased use of humanitarian funding for early action (result carried
                     over from 2020)
          27.42      The subprogramme will continue the work related to early response mechanisms, in line with its
                     mandate, and will enhance its planning, including by developing contingency funding arrangements
                     for increased funding made available to humanitarian partners to respond to emergencies from the
                     early stages, based on forecasts and risk assessments to mitigate the humanitarian impact of the
                     hazard, which is expected to be demonstrated by the performance measure f or 2021 below. For 2020,
                     a proxy performance measure is indicated, to reflect that the General Assembly, in its resolution
                     74/251, approved a programme narrative at the subprogramme level that is composed solely of the
                     objectives approved by the General Assembly in its resolution 71/6 and the deliverables for 2020.




16/53                                                                                                            20-05776
Section 27      Humanitarian assistance

Table 27.4
Performance measure

2017                       2018                   2019                  2020                   2021


N/A                        Central Emergency      Expansion of the      Central Emergency      Central Emergency
                           Response Fund          pilot projects and    Response Fund          Response fund early
                           early action           development of a      early action           action review and
                           approach is piloted    methodology for a     approach is            lessons learned and
                                                  Central Emergency     formalized             utilization of other
                                                  Response Fund early                          financial instruments
                                                  action approach                              for early action

Abbreviation: N/A, not applicable.

                Result 2: an enhanced Global Humanitarian Overview (new result)
       27.43    The Global Humanitarian Overview is the most comprehensive, authoritative and evidence -based
                assessment of global humanitarian needs. It presents costed plans for the coordinated response to
                crises by humanitarian organizations and is the consolidated appeal f or funding published by the
                Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, with contributions from across the United
                Nations, NGOs and other organizations. By providing a detailed assessment of needs and how best
                to meet them, the Overview supports advocacy and system-wide resource mobilization efforts. In
                2019, the subprogramme simultaneously launched the Overview in Berlin, Brussels, Geneva,
                London and Washington, D.C. to coincide with humanitarian funding decisions made by Member
                States and other donors, which resulted in record levels of humanitarian funding, amounting to
                $16 billion, in response to United Nations-coordinated humanitarian appeals. In support of Member
                States, the United Nations mobilizes and coordinates 75 per cent of funding for h umanitarian
                responses worldwide.
       27.44    Over the years and in line with its plan to enhance the humanitarian programme cycle, the
                subprogramme has made significant efforts to strengthen the evidence provided in the Global
                Humanitarian Overview. In particular, the 2020 Overview features strengthened regional and country
                analysis by using improved data analysis techniques. It presents funding needs for the year and
                estimates the number of people to be reached, along with projected resources.

                Internal challenge and response
       27.45    The challenge for the subprogramme was that its resource mobilization strategies at the country level
                were not always used systematically and were not always fully integrated among the broader
                community of stakeholders, which did not fully prevent the duplication of efforts and competition
                for funding. In response, the subprogramme will tailor its resource mobilization strategies and
                advocacy efforts by increasing the focus on the specific needs required to reduce humanitar ian
                suffering and to coordinate, with all relevant stakeholders, more high -level pledging events for
                country- and context-specific emergencies with larger funding gaps. By 2021, the Office for the
                Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs will build on its experience of preparing and launching the
                Global Humanitarian Overview to reduce the funding gap between the needs and the funds raised
                for humanitarian responses.

                Expected progress towards the attainment of the objective, and performance measure
       27.46    This work is expected to contribute to coherent, effective and timely humanitarian response to
                alleviate human suffering in natural disasters and complex emergencies, which would be
                demonstrated by an increased share of humanitarian response plans that are at least 75 per cent
                funded, enabling well-coordinated and prioritized humanitarian action to reach those in need.



20-05776                                                                                                        17/53
Part VI            Humanitarian assistance

Figure 27.IV
Performance measure: humanitarian response plans that are 75 per cent funded, 2017 –2021
(Percentage)


    60
                                                                                                                  50.0
    50                                                                                  45.0

    40
                                                                    30.0
    30
                    18.8                     18.2
    20

    10

       0
                    2017                     2018                  2019                 2020                     2021


                   Legislative mandates

           27.47   The list below provides all mandates entrusted to the subprogramme.

General Assembly resolutions
63/147                New international humanitarian order          74/114           Persistent legacy of the Chernobyl disaster
68/129                Assistance to survivors of the 1994           74/117           Assistance to the Palestinian people
                      genocide in Rwanda, particularly orphans,     74/131           Assistance to refugees, returnees and
                      widows and victims of sexual violence                          displaced persons in Africa
74/9                  The situation in Afghanistan

Security Council Presidential statement
S/PRST/2015/23        Protection of civilians in armed conflict


                   Deliverables

           27.48   Table 27.5 lists all deliverables, by category and subcategory, for the period 2019–2021 that
                   contributed and are expected to contribute to the attainment of the objective stated above.

Table 27.5
Subprogramme 2: deliverables for the period 2019–2021, by category and subcategory

                                                                                         2019        2019        2020           2021
Category and subcategory                                                              planned       actual    planned        planned


A. Facilitation of the intergovernmental process and expert bodies
    Parliamentary documentation (number of documents)                                      4            4           4              4
    1. Report to the General Assembly on the Central Emergency Response Fund               1            1           1              1
    2. High-level pledging events on the provision of international assistance to
       countries affected by humanitarian emergencies                                      3            3           3              3
    Substantive services for meetings (number of three-hour meetings)                      2            2           2              2
    3. High-level meetings and side events of the General Assembly on the
       provision of international assistance to countries affected by humanitarian
       emergencies                                                                         2            2           2              2


18/53                                                                                                                        20-05776
Section 27        Humanitarian assistance


                                                                                          2019       2019        2020        2021
Category and subcategory                                                               planned      actual    planned     planned


B. Generation and transfer of knowledge
    Seminars, workshops and training events (number of days)                                2           2          2              2
    4. Workshops on humanitarian law and other emerging issues for resident
       coordinators/humanitarian coordinators                                               2           2          2              2
C. Substantive deliverables
    Humanitarian assistance missions: strategy-building missions to review humanitarian needs and design appropriate response
    strategies.
    Consultation, advice and advocacy: briefings to the Security Council on specific complex emergency situations; meetings with
    donors, informal briefings and consultations with Member States on specific emergency situations and the financing of
    humanitarian requirements; consolidated inter-agency appeals for specific countries and regions affected by humanitarian
    emergencies; meetings with humanitarian organizations on operations, policies and coordination arrangements; and meetings
    with Member States, regional organizations and the private sector on common humanitarian actions.
    Databases and substantive digital materials: access to monitoring mechanisms in support of operational partners; update and
    maintenance of the roster for resident coordinators/humanitarian coordinators.
D. Communication deliverables
    Outreach programmes, special events and information materials: organization of meetings and special events on specific
    complex emergency situations; Central Emergency Response Fund annual report; consolidated annual report on country -based
    pooled funds; and Global Humanitarian Overview.
E. Enabling deliverables
    Administration: delivering of grants from the Central Emergency Response Fund for new and protracted emergencies and of
    grants from the country-based pool funds.



                  Subprogramme 3
                  Natural disaster risk reduction

                  Objective

        27.49     The objective, to which this subprogramme contributes, is to substantially reduce disaster risk and
                  losses in lives, livelihoods and health and in the economic, physical, social, cultural and
                  environmental assets of persons, businesses, communities and countries.


                  Strategy

        27.50     To contribute to the substantial reduction in disaster risk and losses in lives, livelihoods and health
                  and in the economic, physical, social, cultural and environmental assets of persons, businesses,
                  communities and countries, the subprogramme will continue to provide guidance to countries and
                  stakeholders in the implementation of the Sendai Framework through capacity development,
                  technical assistance, advocacy and the production and dissemination of knowledge resources and
                  best practices. The subprogramme will cooperate with all partners to enhance synergies, coordination
                  and coherence between the Sendai Framework and other global frameworks adopted by Member
                  States in 2015 and beyond. This will involve participation in major events such as the 2019 Climate
                  Action Summit and the Conference of the Parties to the United Nations Framework Convention on
                  Climate Change and contributing to the relevant intergovernmental processes to advocate the
                  interdependency of these frameworks. The subprogramme will support Member States through the
                  development of guidelines on how to integrate disaster risk reduction with climate change and
                  sustainable development at the regional, national and local levels. This work is expected to result in
                  enhanced understanding of disaster risk reduction and more effective disaster risk reduction
                  strategies at the regional, national and local levels that align with the 2030 Agenda. Past results in
                  these areas include improved knowledge of probabilistic risk assessment for disast er risk


20-05776                                                                                                                   19/53
Part VI         Humanitarian assistance

                management in sub-Saharan African countries achieved through the development of country -level
                risk profiles for 16 countries. The subprogramme will continue to focus on reviewing progress
                achieved in the implementation of the Sendai Framework, including through the organization of
                stock-taking exercises such as the Regional Platforms for Disaster Risk Reduction and through the
                provision of technical support to Member States to report on the global targets of the Framework
                and on the 11 indicators of Sustainable Development Goals 1, 11 and 13 using the Framework
                monitoring system. This work is expected to result in increased national accountability and
                commitment to implement the Sendai Framework. Past results in these areas include the
                establishment of national disaster risk reduction platforms comprised of partners from across
                relevant government departments, United Nations agencies, donors and other stakeholders, which
                will assist in monitoring and reporting against both the Sendai Framework targets and the Goals.
                The subprogramme will continue to work with practitioners, experts and innovators around the world
                to generate risk knowledge and analysis on risk trends, patterns, progress and challenges, including
                through the production of a special Global Assessment Report on Disaster Risk Reduction focusing
                on drought and the operationalization of the global risk assessment framework to develop innovative
                approaches and adopt new solutions and working practices to assessing and modelling risk. This
                work is expected to result in risk-informed decision-making, enhanced risk awareness and improved
                understanding and management of current and future risks. Past results in these areas include the
                production of six Global Assessment Reports on Disaster Risk Reduction since 2009, which are
                considered the United Nations flagship reports on global efforts to reduce risk and which have
                supported risk-informed decision-making. The subprogramme will promote an all-of-society
                approach by engaging with a wide range of stakeholders and facilitating their participation in the
                relevant processes at all levels, including by promoting accessibility and gender parity, using online
                platforms to widen the reach of knowledge products, advocating the integration of disaster risk
                reduction into humanitarian/development contexts and developing guidance materials to strengthen
                humanitarian-development collaboration. This action is expected to result in multi -sector and
                inclusive disaster risk reduction interventions addressing the nee ds of the most vulnerable, thereby
                contributing to leaving no one behind. Past results in this area include the development of joint
                recommendations on how displacement can be featured in national disaster risk reduction strategies
                and plans and the production of guidance on how to reduce disaster displacement risk and strengthen
                resilience.


                Programme performance in 2019 against planned result

        27.51   A planned result for 2019, which is increased national capacity and commitment to reduce disaster
                risk and implement the Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction 2015 –2030, as referred to in
                the proposed programme budget for the biennium 2018 –2019, was achieved in part, as evidenced by
                the 130 Member and observer States (compared with a target of 150) using the Framework monitor
                to report on progress in the implementation of the Framework. Notwithstanding the short period of
                time since the launch of the monitor in March 2018, the level of reporting shows significant progress
                towards the expected accomplishment.


                Programme performance in 2019: improved understanding of risk
                contributed to risk-informed policymaking for disaster risk reduction

        27.52   With the increasing complexity and interaction of human, economic, political and natural systems,
                risk becomes more systemic. This evolving nature of risks requires the constant updating and
                refinement of risk knowledge and analysis, taking into account specific contexts. In addition,
                consistent and systematic reporting on progress against the Sendai Framework targets enables more
                in-depth analysis of risk trends and patterns at all levels. It also provides further understanding of
                the risk and impact of disasters, thereby allowing more effective evidence -based decisions to be
                taken and impactful disaster risk reduction policies and interventions to be developed.



20/53                                                                                                          20-05776
Section 27     Humanitarian assistance

       27.53   The subprogramme produced several knowledge resources, including the Global Assessment Report
               on Disaster Risk Reduction 2019, which examined the increasingly systemic nature of disaster risk.
               The assessment report contained proposals for strategies to enhance the scientific, social and political
               cooperation needed to move towards systemic risk governance. In 2019, the United Nations Office
               for Disaster Risk Reduction launched and disseminated three “Words into Action” guidelines on the
               development and implementation of local disaster risk reduction and resilience strategies, the
               development of national disaster risk reduction strategies, and disaster displacement.
       27.54   The subprogramme also organized, in 2019, the sixth session of the Global Platform for Disaster
               Risk Reduction, which is the multi-stakeholder forum established by the General Assembly for
               strategic advice on and coordination and review of the implementation of int ernational instruments
               on disaster risk reduction. The Global Platform gathers the world’s top disaster risk reduction
               thinkers and practitioners, policymakers, government officials and other stakeholders to take stock,
               debate and reaffirm their commitment to reducing disaster impact, providing guidance on the way
               forward. Outcomes of the 2019 Global Platform also contributed to the discussions held at the high -
               level political forum on sustainable development, in July 2019, as well as to the 2019 Climate Ac tion
               Summit.
       27.55   The subprogramme also implemented initiatives at the global, regional, national and local levels
               aimed at strengthening the capacities of national officials in disaster loss data collection, analysis
               and reporting. This included reporting through the official Member State reporting mechanism,
               namely, the online Sendai Framework monitoring system. The reporting mechanism enabled
               Member States to report on Sendai Framework targets and on the 11 indicators associated with
               Sustainable Development Goals 1, 11 and 13, thereby further contributing to risk -informed policies.
       27.56   At the national level, the subprogramme worked closely with United Nations partners and national
               counterparts to prepare national disaster risk reduction status repor ts that provide an analysis of
               countries’ risk profiles and vulnerabilities. The reports also present progress made under the four
               priorities of the Sendai Framework, identify some key challenges surrounding the issue of creating
               coherence among the key global frameworks at the country level and include recommendations for
               strengthening overall disaster risk management governance. The subprogramme also provided
               training and technical assistance to support national Governments in updating their disaster loss data
               and using the Sendai Framework monitoring system. In addition, countries benefited from training
               and technical assistance in developing national and local disaster risk reduction strategies, in line
               with the Sendai Framework principles and in coheren ce with multi-stakeholder national adaptation
               plans.

               Progress towards the attainment of the objective, and performance measure
       27.57   This work contributed to substantially reducing disaster risk and losses in lives, livelihoods and
               health and in the economic, physical, social, cultural and environmental assets of persons,
               businesses, communities and countries, as demonstrated by 130 Member and observer States using
               the Sendai Framework monitor to report on progress in the implementation of the Framewo rk, which
               enables improved understanding of disaster risks and risk-informed policies through data collection
               and reporting. As pointed out by the Senior Disaster Management Officer in the Office of the Prime
               Minister of Uganda and national focal point for the Sendai Framework, Pamela Komujuni, during a
               capacity development workshop, “Data, especially on impact of disasters, is important to shape
               policy development”. Referring to a concrete example in Uganda, she said that, “because of being
               able to monitor the trends and collecting data on disaster impacts, especially on the damages and
               losses, we were able to actually come up with a clear picture that helped inform the country’s current
               resettlement policy which is being implemented to reduce the vulnerabi lity of people in the
               mountainous areas of Elgon region, which is very prone to landslide disasters”.




20-05776                                                                                                          21/53
Part VI            Humanitarian assistance

Table 27.6
Performance measure

2015                         2016                    2017                    2018                    2019


Sendai Framework             Open-ended              Recommendations         88 Member States        130 Member and
for Disaster Risk            intergovernmental       of the working          using the Sendai        observer States
Reduction endorsed           expert working          group endorsed by       Framework monitor       using the Sendai
by the General               group developed         the General             to report progress in   Framework monitor
Assembly                     indicators for the 7    Assembly                the implementation      to report progress in
                             global targets of the                           of the Framework        the implementation
                             Sendai Framework                                                        of the Framework


                   Planned results for 2021

                   Result 1: disaster risk reduction strategies created through coherence,
                   inclusiveness and partnerships (result carried over from 2020)
           27.58   The subprogramme will continue the work related to disaster risk reduction, in line with its mandate,
                   and will support countries in developing more effective national disaster risk reduction strategies,
                   based on forecasts and risk assessments to mitigate the humanitarian impact of the hazard, which is
                   expected to be demonstrated by the performance measure for 2021 below. For 2020, a proxy
                   performance measure is indicated, to reflect that the General Assembly, in its resolution 74/251,
                   approved a programme narrative at the subprogramme level that is composed solely of the objectives
                   approved by the General Assembly in its resolution 71/6 and the deliverables for 2020.

Figure 27.V
Performance measure: number of countries that develop/improve national and local disaster risk
reduction strategies, 2017–2021

 160                                                                                                        150
 140
                                                                                     120
 120
 100
                                                               81
  80
  60                                         51

  40
  20
                   N/A
       0
                   2017                      2018             2019                  2020                    2021

Abbreviation: N/A, not applicable.

                   Result 2: accelerating the achievement of Sendai Framework target (e) by
                   increasing the number and quality of national and local disaster risk reduction
                   strategies (new result)
           27.59   The Sendai Framework sets out an agreed global policy blueprint for reducing disaster risk and
                   outlines seven global targets. Six of these seven global targets are to be met by 2030. The 2020
                   deadline for target (e) (substantially increase the number of countries with national and local disaster
                   risk reduction strategies) was established in recognition of the importance of the strategies as
                   enablers to achieve the remaining six targets. The strategies are crucial to laying the foundation for


22/53                                                                                                               20-05776
Section 27     Humanitarian assistance

               other disaster risk management efforts and to achieve the Sendai Framework goal of preventing new
               and reducing existing disaster risks and of strengthening economic, social, health and environmental
               resilience. The Sendai Framework monitor system contains 10 key requirements for the national
               disaster risk reduction strategies to ensure that they are aligned with the Framework. The strategies
               are expected to promote policy coherence with sustainable development, poverty eradication and
               climate change, thereby preventing the creation of new risk, reducing existing risk and strengthening
               economic, social, health and environmental resilience. They should have clear timelines, indicators
               and targets and establish mechanisms to follow up on, assess and publicly report on progress. The
               strategies are also expected to contribute to the four priorities for action of the Sendai Framework
               that focus on (a) understanding disaster risk; (b) strengthening disaster risk governance; (c) investing
               in disaster risk reduction for resilience; and (d) enhancing preparedness for effective response to
               “build back better” in recovery, rehabilitation and reconstruction.
       27.60   The subprogramme has been providing support to countries in developing and updating their disaster
               risk reduction strategies to promote compliance with the Sendai Framework principles and enhance
               their quality and effectiveness. The subprogramme has been providing technical assistance and
               training to help Governments to develop monitoring frameworks for disaster risk reduction strategies
               through support for risk data collection and the establishment and updating of disaster loss databases.
               The United Nations Office for Disaster Risk Reduction has been focusing on the use of the Sendai
               Framework monitor system as the official Member State mechanism for reporting on the
               Framework’s global targets. When reporting on target (e) in the monitor, countries need to first
               identify the existence of national strategies for disaster risk reduction, then apply a score against
               each of the 10 above-mentioned requirements to assess the extent to which their national strategies
               are aligned with the Sendai Framework. In this way, a compounded score of alignment with the
               Sendai Framework principles is available for each strategy, reflecting its overall quality and
               providing the basis for comparative analysis and assessing progress.

               Internal challenge and response
       27.61   The challenge for the subprogramme was to adapt the approach and tools to different contexts and
               provide tailored and more effective support to national counterparts in developing and improving
               the quality of the national disaster risk reduction strategies. Development does not follow a li near
               path and integrating disaster risk reduction into development strategies is complex and highly
               context-specific. Countries are pursuing a range of entry points in their efforts to undertake risk -
               informed development. In response, the subprogramme will continue to foster a coherent approach
               to climate change action and sustainable development through the development of guidance
               materials and methodologies that take into account countries’ specific needs. The subprogramme
               will also promote the exchange of best practices between countries in similar situations and
               strengthen its online platform for a wider dissemination of the knowledge resources produced,
               ensuring that it is accessible to all stakeholders. The United Nations Office for Disaster Risk
               Reduction will also continue to roll out the Sendai Framework monitor custom indicators and targets
               as a key tool to monitor and support the implementation of the disaster risk reduction strategies
               through nationally defined indicators and targets. It will also strengthen its support to Resident
               Coordinators and United Nations country teams, ensuring that risk data and evidence are updated
               and available to contribute to risk-informed country analyses and planning processes so that United
               Nations partners on the ground are able to support the national counterparts in the development and
               implementation of effective national disaster risk reduction strategies, in line with the Sendai
               Framework principles.

               Expected progress towards the attainment of the objective, and performance measure
       27.62   This work is expected to contribute to the substantial reduction of disaster risk and losses in lives
               livelihoods and health and in the economic, physical, social, cultural and environmental assets of
               persons, businesses, communities and countries , which would be demonstrated by the enhanced
               quality of the national disaster risk reduction strategies and their alignment with the Sendai
               Framework, measured using the above-mentioned compounded score.

20-05776                                                                                                          23/53
Part VI          Humanitarian assistance

Figure 27.VI
Performance measure: average score of alignment of national strategies with the Sendai Framework,
2017–2021

 160                                                                                                   150
 140
                                                                              120
 120
 100                                                           90
  80
  60
  40
  20
                 N/A                       N/A
   0
                 2017                   2018                   2019          2020                     2021

Abbreviation: N/A, not applicable.


                 Legislative mandates

         27.63   The list below provides all mandates entrusted to the subprogramme.

General Assembly resolutions
54/219             International Decade for Natural Disaster     69/284     Establishment of an open-ended
                   Reduction: successor arrangements                        intergovernmental expert working group on
56/195             International Strategy for Disaster                      indicators and terminology relating to
                   Reduction                                                disaster risk reduction

63/137             Strengthening emergency relief,               70/204     International Strategy for Disaster
                   rehabilitation, reconstruction and                       Reduction
                   prevention in the aftermath of the Indian     71/226     Disaster risk reduction
                   Ocean tsunami disaster                        72/218     Disaster risk reduction
63/217             Natural disasters and vulnerability           73/230     Effective global response to address the
67/209             International Strategy for Disaster                      impacts of the El Niño phenomenon
                   Reduction                                     73/231     Disaster risk reduction
69/283             Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk            74/218     Disaster risk reduction
                   Reduction 2015–2030

Economic and Social Council resolution
2018/14            Strategic Framework on Geospatial
                   Information and Services for Disasters


                 Deliverables

         27.64   Table 27.7 lists all deliverables, by category and subcategory, for the period 2019 –2021 that
                 contributed and are expected to contribute to the attainment of the objective stated above.




24/53                                                                                                             20-05776
Section 27        Humanitarian assistance

Table 27.7
Subprogramme 3: deliverables for the period 2019–2021, by category and subcategory

                                                                                            2019       2019        2020        2021
Category and subcategory                                                                 planned      actual    planned     planned


A. Facilitation of the intergovernmental process and expert bodies
    Parliamentary documentation (number of documents)                                         2           2           3           2
    1. Report to the General Assembly on the implementation of the Sendai
       Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction 2015–2030                                        1           1           1           1
    2. Provision of substantive and technical support to General Assembly (Second
       Committee) resolution negotiations on disaster risk reduction (annual) and
       effective global response to address the impacts of the El Niño phenomenon
       (biennial)                                                                             1           1           2           1
    Substantive services for meetings (number of three-hour meetings)                         1           1           1           1
    3. General Assembly plenary (Second Committee), agenda item on sustainable
       development.                                                                           1           1           1           1
B. Generation and transfer of knowledge
    Field and technical cooperation projects (number of projects)                            29          29          29         29
    4. National, regional and interregional projects related to the implementation of
       the Sendai Framework                                                                  29          29          29         29
    Seminars, workshops and training events (number of days)                                323         328        323         323
    5. Capacity development training and workshops for regional, national and local
       disaster risk reduction planning and implementation and monitoring of the
       Sendai Framework                                                                     323         328        323         323
    Publications (number of publications)                                                     4           4           3           5
    6. Global Assessment Report on Disaster Risk Reduction and Global Assessment
       Report special reports                                                                 1           1           1           1
    7. United Nations Office for Disaster Risk Reduction annual report                        1           1           1           1
    8. United Nations Office for Disaster Risk Reduction biennial work programme
       and strategic framework                                                                1           1           –           2
    9. United Nations Plan of Action on Disaster Risk Reduction for Resilience:
       Towards a Risk-informed and Integrated Approach to Sustainable
       Development (progress report)                                                          1           1           1           1
    Technical materials (number of materials)                                                11          16          11         14
    10. Best practices, standards, guidance and other tools to promote learning and
        knowledge-sharing for the monitoring and implementation of the Sendai
        Framework                                                                             9          14           6         10
    11. Policy guidance on the application of risk knowledge                                  1           1           –           1
    12. Outcome documents of the regional and global platforms                                1           1           5           3
C. Substantive deliverables
    Consultation, advice and advocacy: formulation of regional, subregional, national and local strategies and plans; national
    contingency planning and disaster preparedness; risk governance capacities of local and urban bodies; and intergovernmental
    processes to advance the implementation of the Sendai Framework, to support policy coherence on disaster risk reduct ion across
    sectors, such as the Conference of States Parties on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities, the multi -stakeholder forum on
    science, technology and innovation for the Sustainable Development Goals, and to facilitate the implementation of the Un ited
    Nations Plan of Action on Disaster Risk Reduction for Resilience: Towards a Risk -informed and Integrated Approach to
    Sustainable Development through its results framework and the Economic and Social Council integration segment, among
    others.
    Databases and substantive digital materials: maintenance and further enhancement of the Sendai Framework monitor for
    monitoring and reporting; monitoring the Framework annually; further operationalization of the global risk assessment
    framework; and assistance in establishing and managing disaster loss databases.



20-05776                                                                                                                      25/53
Part VI           Humanitarian assistance


                                                                                           2019       2019        2020        2021
Category and subcategory                                                                planned      actual    planned     planned


D. Communication deliverables
    Outreach programmes, special events and informative materials: organization of regional platforms and high-level meetings
    on disaster risk reduction; World Tsunami Awareness Day events; Sendai Seven Campaign: Seven Targets, Seven
    Years/International Day for Disaster Reduction events; and newsletters, press releases and notes verbales on Sendai Framework
    monitoring published and/or disseminated.
    External and media relations: high-level advocacy of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for Disaster Risk
    Reduction through high-level advocacy missions, press releases, op-eds, web stories, social media posts, videos and press
    coverage.



                  Subprogramme 4
                  Emergency support services

                  Objective

        27.65     The objective, to which this subprogramme contributes, is to expedite international humanitarian
                  assistance to victims of complex emergencies and natural disasters.


                  Strategy

        27.66     To contribute to expedited international humanitarian assistance to victims of complex emergencies
                  and natural disasters, the subprogramme will provide effective and well-coordinated response
                  support. This will include operational response support to conflict - and disaster-affected countries
                  through the management of various technical response services, including the United Nations
                  Disaster Assessment and Coordination Team mechanism and International Search and Rescue
                  Advisory Group system; providing support to the strengthening and capacity -building of Member
                  State mechanisms for emergency response; promoting the membership of developing and disaster-
                  prone countries in emergency response networks; the developing and strengthening of the capacities
                  for the coordination of humanitarian response and the improvement in mechanisms, instruments and
                  procedures for the mobilization and coordination of international assistance in cases of natural
                  disasters and complex emergencies; managing and expanding the United Nations Disaster
                  Assessment and Coordination Team in different regions; standardizing operational procedures for
                  international urban search and rescue teams through the International Search and Rescue Advisory
                  Group network, surge mechanisms and improving coordination among the various mechanisms; and
                  activating and coordinating rapid response coordination platforms such as the virtual On-Site
                  Operations Coordination Centre, the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs online
                  coordination platform for sudden-onset disasters and the Global Disaster Alert and Coordination
                  System, providing near real-time alerts on natural disasters around the world and tools to facilitate
                  response coordination. This work is expected to result in reduced mortality from disasters. The
                  subprogramme will also support coordinated, principled and coherent engagement between
                  humanitarian and armed actors to better ensure that affected people are reached and that their
                  humanitarian needs are met. Past results in these areas include: (a) as of December 2018, the United
                  Nations Disaster Assessment and Coordination Team having conducted 287 emergency missions in
                  more than 100 countries; and (b) 53 International Search and Rescue Advisory Group classified
                  teams being readily deployable worldwide.


                  Programme performance in 2019 against planned result

        27.67     A planned result for 2019, which was prompt mobilization of international emergency response
                  mechanisms to facilitate international humanitarian assistance to victims of disasters and
                  emergencies, as referred to in the proposed programme budget for the biennium 2018 –2019, was

26/53                                                                                                                      20-05776
Section 27     Humanitarian assistance

               achieved in part, as evidenced by international assistance being provided to the affected country
               within 48 to 72 hours (compared with a target of 48 hours) of its request for international assistance.


               Programme performance in 2019: enhanced urban search and
               rescue for international humanitarian response

       27.68   Although the world is better at predicting, preparing for and responding to disasters, disaster risks
               continue to increase. To prepare for rapid response in sudden onset emergencies, the subprogramme
               manages different emergency response mechanisms addressing various response requirements. One
               of these is the International Search and Rescue Advisory Group, whose primary purpose is to
               facilitate coordination between the various international urban search and rescue teams that make
               themselves available for deployment to countries experiencing the devastating events of structural
               collapse owing primarily to earthquakes. The Advisory Group developed guidelines and
               methodology for urban search and rescue operations to ensure the standardized training and
               structures of international urban search and rescue.
       27.69   The subprogramme, as a secretariat to the International Search and Rescue Advisory Group network,
               continued its efforts to build the capacity of Member States in the area of rapid response, including
               search and rescue. This is accomplished through the Advisory Group ’s external classification system,
               which standardizes operational procedures, capacities and resources across its members, as well as
               the conduct of region-wide earthquake response simulations. Seven external reclassifications and
               three external classifications were successfully completed in 2019, the latter in China (combat search
               and rescue, October), Pakistan (rescue 1122, October) and Indonesia (Advisory Group, November).
       27.70   In addition, the subprogramme conducted three regional earthquake simulation exercises in 2019 in an
               effort to strengthen country- and regional-level response capacities to respond to a major earthquake
               disaster and to enhance the ability of countries to work with international partners and agencies during
               the initial humanitarian phase of any emergency. In 2019, a regional earthquake response exercise was
               conducted in Azerbaijan. This exercise involved 161 participants, including 14 urban search and rescue
               teams, 5 emergency medical teams, 1 United Nations Disaster Assessment and Coordination Team and
               10 international organizations. The exercise resulted in increased awareness and better application of
               International Search and Rescue Advisory Group disaster response methodologies among national and
               local authorities in the region and with international responders. Other similar earthquake response
               exercises were held in Cuba (16–20 September) and Thailand (15–17 December), resulting in enhanced
               regional response capacities. Altogether, in 2019, the subprogramme trained more than 600 responders
               and stakeholders in earthquake response from Asia and the Pacific, Latin America and Caribbean and
               the Central Europe region.

               Progress towards the attainment of the objective, and performance measure
       27.71   This work contributed to expediting international humanitarian assistance, as demonstrated by the
               fact that more International Search and Rescue Advisory Group classified teams are trained to be
               deployed worldwide immediately when disasters hit, ensuring timely, coor dinated and technically
               sound assistance.




20-05776                                                                                                          27/53
Part VI         Humanitarian assistance

Figure 27.VII
Performance measure: number of International Search and Rescue Advisory Group classified teams to be
deployed worldwide immediately, 2015–2019

  60                                                                                                   56
                                                                                53
                                                           50
  50             44                       45

  40

  30

  20

  10

   0
                2015                  2016                2017                 2018                   2019



                Planned results for 2021

                Result 1: enhanced capacity for rapid response coordination (result carried
                over from 2020)
        27.72   The subprogramme will continue the work related to urban search and rescue, in line with its
                mandate, and will assist Governments in enhancing their capacity to deliver improved urban search
                and rescue responses, based on forecasts and risk assessments to mitigate the hum anitarian impact
                of the hazard, which is expected to be demonstrated by the performance measure for 2021 below.
                For 2020, a proxy performance measure is indicated, to reflect that the General Assembly, in its
                resolution 74/251, approved a programme narrative at the subprogramme level that is composed
                solely of the objectives approved by the General Assembly in its resolution 71/6 and the deliverables
                for 2020.

Table 27.8
Performance measure

2017                       2018                   2019                  2020                   2021


N/A                        Improved               Training              Adoption by 70         Adoption by 73
                           interoperability       methodologies and     national               national
                           among urban search     products for search   Governments and        Governments and
                           and rescue teams is    and rescue teams      urban search and       urban search and
                           defined as one of      are harmonized and    rescue teams of        rescue teams of
                           the priorities for     updated to            International Search   International Search
                           International Search   strengthen            and Rescue             and Rescue
                           and Rescue             interoperability of   Advisory Group         Advisory Group
                           Advisory Group         response              methodology for        methodology for
                           training               mechanisms            preparedness and       preparedness and
                                                                        response at the        response at the
                                                                        national and           national and
                                                                        international levels   international levels

Abbreviation: N/A, not applicable.




28/53                                                                                                         20-05776
Section 27     Humanitarian assistance

               Result 2: strengthened rapid response capacities through standardized and
               improved response methodologies (new result)
       27.73   The United Nations Disaster Assessment and Coordination Team mechanism, created in 1993, is part
               of the international emergency response system to support disaster-affected countries during the first
               phase of a sudden-onset emergency. Teams are comprised of Member State emergency and disaster
               management experts trained to deliver operational crisis coordination, coordinated assessments,
               situational analysis, information management and reporting. With the ability to deploy as
               self-supporting units, the teams can deploy at short notice (12 to 48 hours) to anywhere in the world
               to help to coordinate incoming international relief at the national level or at the site of the emergency.
               Supported by operational partners, the teams quickly mobilize the basic infrastructure needed to
               support response efforts, such as information and communications technology, logistics,
               accommodation, working space and facilities, as well as coordination platforms for other response
               organizations and networks.
       27.74   The United Nations Disaster Assessment and Coordination Team system has been responding to
               changes in response requirements by evolving its methodology, based on mission experiences and
               new developments in emergency response. In particular, it is focusing more on building the
               capacities of local and regional responders in emergency preparedness and response to facilitate
               more context-specific and relevant approaches. To this end, in 2019, teams worked to strengthen the
               capacity of national authorities and regional organizations to gain access to and coordinate
               international humanitarian assistance effectively and to become self -reliant in the coordination of
               national humanitarian assistance during emergency response. For example, this was d one through
               response coordination support during Cyclone Idai in Mozambique and Cyclone Kenneth in the
               Comoros. Teams also contributed to preparedness through capacity -building activities during
               assessment missions of the Capacity for Disaster Risk Reduction Initiative to Bolivia and Mauritius
               and by participating as associates in the capacity assessment missions of other institutions. Team
               members also acted as international observers and advisers during emergency response simulation
               exercises conducted in Azerbaijan, Cuba and Thailand.

               Internal challenge and response
       27.75   The challenge for the subprogramme was that the training methodology had to be adapted to the
               diverse backgrounds of responders. This generated the need for even greater knowledge -sharing and
               coordination efforts among national and international responders.
       27.76   In response, the subprogramme will adjust the United Nations Disaster Assessment and Coordination
               Team response model to place an increased emphasis on local and regional approaches to emergency
               preparedness and response, including preparing to respond to seasonal emergencies. This will be
               accomplished by strengthening collaboration with regional surge mechanisms to capitalize on best
               practices, as well as joint preparedness planning initiatives. Training will incorporate updated tools
               for a variety of preparedness and response scenarios.
       27.77   To this end, in 2021, the subprogramme will undertake three regional (the Americas, Asia and the
               Pacific and Europe-Africa-Middle East) and two global United Nations Disaster Assessment and
               Coordination Team training courses in collaboration with Member States and operational partners.
               The Team trainings will ensure that all its active members remain ready to deploy for response -and-
               preparedness missions.

               Expected progress towards the attainment of the objective, and performance measure
       27.78   This work is expected to contribute to expedited international humanitarian assistance to victims of
               complex emergencies and natural disasters by strengthening the response capacity of national and
               regional responders, which would be demonstrated by 150 emergency managers and humanitarian
               experts able to apply local and regional approaches to emergency preparedness and response.




20-05776                                                                                                            29/53
Part VI           Humanitarian assistance

Figure 27.VIII
Performance measure: number of United Nations Disaster Assessment and Coordination Team members
trained in the application of local and regional emergency preparedness and response approaches,
2017–2021

 160                                                                                                      150
 140
                                                                                 120
 120
 100                                                               90
   80
   60
   40
   20
                   N/A                      N/A
    0
                  2017                     2018                    2019         2020                      2021

Abbreviation: N/A, not applicable.


                  Legislative mandates

         27.79    The list below provides all mandates entrusted to the subprogramme.

General Assembly resolutions
56/99                 Emergency response to disasters                 68/99    Strengthening of international cooperation
60/13                 Strengthening emergency relief,                          and coordination of efforts to study,
                      rehabilitation, reconstruction and                       mitigate and minimize the consequences of
                      prevention in the aftermath of the South                 the Chernobyl disaster
                      Asian earthquake disaster – Pakistan            69/280   Strengthening emergency relief,
63/137                Strengthening emergency relief,                          rehabilitation and reconstruction in
                      rehabilitation, reconstruction and                       response to the devastating effects of the
                      prevention in the aftermath of the Indian                earthquake in Nepal
                      Ocean tsunami disaster                          74/114   Persistent legacy of the Chernobyl disaster
65/307                Improving the effectiveness and
                      coordination of military and civil defence
                      assets for natural disaster response


                  Deliverables

         27.80    Table 27.9 lists all deliverables, by category and subcategory, for the period 2019 –2021 that
                  contributed and are expected to contribute to the attainment of the objective stated above.

Table 27.9
Subprogramme 4: deliverables for the period 2019–2021, by category and subcategory

                                                                                   2019        2019         2020        2021
Category and subcategory                                                        planned       actual     planned     planned


B. Generation and transfer of knowledge
    Field and technical cooperation projects (number of projects)                      7          5              5           5
    1. Project on interoperability of response tools and procedures                    1          1              1           1
    2. Projects on response capacity-building                                          6          4              4           4



30/53                                                                                                                20-05776
Section 27        Humanitarian assistance


                                                                                            2019    2019         2020       2021
Category and subcategory                                                                 planned   actual     planned    planned


    Seminars, workshops and training events (number of days)                                 50       50          50           50
    3. Regional and international trainings, workshops and simulation exercises on
       various response services and field coordination (e.g., United Nations Disaster
       Assessment and Coordination Team; United Nations humanitarian civil-
       military coordination; Environmental Emergency Response; and International
       Search and Rescue Advisory Group humanitarian programme cycle)                        50       50          50           50
C. Substantive deliverables
    Consultation, advice and advocacy: advisory services to key stakeholders and Member States on rapid response coordination,
    including United Nations humanitarian civil-military coordination and integrating environmental considerations into
    humanitarian response.
    Humanitarian assistance missions: 3–5 United Nations humanitarian civil-military coordination support missions (upon
    request) annually; 3–10 United Nations Disaster Assessment and Coordination Team missions annually (subject to occurrence of
    disasters and at the request of disaster-affected Governments or humanitarian country teams); provision of humanitarian
    coordination support for emergency core relief; and provision of technical support for rapid assessment and emergency
    preparedness planning.
    Databases and substantive digital materials: guidance, tools and handbooks on humanitarian coordination response services,
    including: (a) revision of International Search and Rescue Advisory Group guidelines; and (b) update and maintenanc e of
    electronic tools related to rapid response and humanitarian coordination.
D. Communication deliverables
    Outreach programmes, special events and information materials: annual partnership and outreach event to facilitate
    collaboration and interoperability among humanitarian responders; and approximately 3 –5 norms/guidance/tools on emergency
    response services annually.
    Digital platforms and multimedia content: update and maintenance of websites dedicated to various technical humanitarian
    response services.



                  Subprogramme 5
                  Humanitarian emergency information and advocacy

                  Objective

        27.81     The objective, to which this subprogramme contributes, is to ensure effective advocacy of
                  humanitarian principles and knowledge-sharing in serving populations affected by disasters and
                  emergencies.


                  Strategy

        27.82     To contribute to effective advocacy of humanitarian principles in serving pop ulations affected by
                  disasters and emergencies, the subprogramme will intensify its efforts to raise public awareness of
                  humanitarian law through targeted communications with clear messages tailored to specific
                  audiences, proactive media engagement and more field-oriented messaging. This work is expected
                  to result in increased respect for international humanitarian law in order to enhance the protection
                  of affected people; improve unimpeded and unfettered access to humanitarian assistance; and
                  increase the number of women and girls empowered to participate in and benefit from humanitarian
                  response. Past results in this area include the commemoration of the seventieth anniversary of the
                  Geneva Conventions of 12 August 1949 to help to further positive action i n respect for international
                  humanitarian law, in part by supporting two special events for Member States during the Economic
                  and Social Council humanitarian affairs segment and the high -level week of the General Assembly.
                  The subprogramme also produced a variety of digital content highlighting the importance of
                  humanitarian principles and international humanitarian law that was shared on the corporate website
                  and digital and social media platforms.


20-05776                                                                                                                   31/53
Part VI         Humanitarian assistance

        27.83   To contribute to effective knowledge-sharing in serving populations affected by disasters and
                emergencies, the subprogramme will continue to produce and improve its analytical information
                products, including the digital humanitarian situation report. This action is expected to result in the
                dissemination of more timely and accurate information on humanitarian crises to facilitate life -
                saving decision-making. This includes intersectoral analysis of the humanitarian situation and its
                severity, risk, vulnerability and needs. Past results in this area include t he launch and implementation
                of digital situation reports in 15 countries and five different languages, broadening access to
                humanitarian information in a timely manner. The subprogramme also leveraged its own digital
                platforms (ReliefWeb, humanitarianresponse.info and the Office for the Coordination of
                Humanitarian Affairs corporate website) to globally disseminate information, thereby increasing
                public awareness of humanitarian crises and needs around the world. ReliefWeb published more than
                3,400 reporting and visualization products. More than 10 million people gained access to crisis
                information on ReliefWeb in 2019, including humanitarian workers, Member States, media, the
                private sector, academia and civil society.


                Programme performance in 2019 against planned result

        27.84   A planned result for 2019, which was better informed decision -making by the humanitarian
                community though access to relevant information, as referred to in the proposed programme budget
                for the biennium 2018–2019, was achieved in part, as evidenced by 10.78 million (compared with a
                target of 26.95 million) unique visitors on the core web platforms of the Office for the Coordination
                of Humanitarian Affairs in 2019.


                Programme performance in 2019: humanitarian responders
                receive real-time and dynamic information and analysis

        27.85   Sudden onset natural disasters and conflict-related complex emergencies have an impact on millions
                of people annually. To ensure the effectiveness of the international humanitarian response,
                humanitarian agencies require timely, reliable and regularly updated information on the evolving
                scope and changing nature of the humanitarian needs that have an impact on affected people. In
                2019, the subprogramme continued to strengthen systems for the assessment, analysis and timely
                dissemination of humanitarian information. In cases of disasters and emergencies, humanitarian
                responders rely on real-time information and quality analysis that enable them to make strategic
                decisions to best serve people affected by the crisis. Aiming to consolidate the various field reporting
                products of the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, the subprogramme developed
                the digital situation report, which provides information in a single online format with more dynamic,
                visual and analytical content, while allowing for real-time updates.

                Progress towards the attainment of the objective, and performance measure
        27.86   This work contributed to effective knowledge-sharing, as demonstrated by the increased use of the
                digital situation reports, providing real-time information about the disaster and its evolution in 15
                countries (from only 3 countries in 2018).




32/53                                                                                                             20-05776
Section 27      Humanitarian assistance

Figure 27.IX
Performance measure: number of humanitarian crises in which digital situation reports are used,
2015–2019

  16                                                                                                       15
  14
  12
  10
   8
   6
   4                                                                               3
   2
                N/A                   N/A                   N/A
   0
                2015                  2016                  2017                  2018                    2019

Abbreviation: N/A, not applicable.


                Planned results for 2021

                Result 1: streamlined information for responders through digital humanitarian
                situation reports – a faster, more dynamic and analytical tool (result carried
                over from 2020)
       27.87    The subprogramme will continue the work related to the processing of humanitarian information and
                make analytical content readily available to decision makers, in line with it s mandate, and will
                provide streamlined information to humanitarian partners for rapid, effective and principled
                humanitarian response, based on forecasts and risk assessments to mitigate the humanitarian impact
                of the hazard, which is expected to be demonstrated by the performance measure for 2021 below.
                For 2020, a proxy performance measure is indicated, to reflect that the General Assembly, in its
                resolution 74/251, approved a programme narrative at the subprogramme level that is composed
                solely of the objectives approved by the General Assembly in its resolution 71/6 and the deliverables
                for 2020.

Table 27.10
Performance measure

2017                       2018                   2019                     2020                    2021


N/A                        Use of first digital   Use of digital           Use of digital          Full adoption of
                           situation reports      humanitarian             humanitarian            digital situation
                           piloted in 3           situation reports in     situation reports in    reports by all
                           humanitarian crises    7 humanitarian           11 humanitarian         humanitarian crises
                                                  crises                   crises

Abbreviation: N/A, not applicable.

                Result 2: increased availability of humanitarian information for humanitarian
                response planning (new result)
       27.88    The subprogramme aims to strengthen the provision of timely and reliable information on unfolding
                emergencies and natural disasters in support of decision-making and humanitarian action, leveraging
                the digital services to facilitate the availability of inf ormation to a wide range of humanitarian users,


20-05776                                                                                                             33/53
Part VI             Humanitarian assistance

                    such as by improving and scaling up the digital situation report tool to be used for different reporting
                    needs, flash updates for the sudden onset of crises and regional reporting, as well as by increasing
                    multilingual interfaces for the major platforms that the subprogramme operates.

                    Internal challenge and response
         27.89      The challenge for the subprogramme was to rationalize and modernize digital information platforms
                    and ensure the availability of information on various digital devices. In response, the subprogramme
                    will streamline the flow of data and information so that users are confident that the information that
                    they are getting is the most up-to-date and authoritative. The subprogramme will rationalize and
                    modernize the main information platforms of the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
                    to enable increased availability and interoperability among the databases behind these platforms and
                    improve access to humanitarian information by users working in the humanitarian sector.

                    Expected progress towards the attainment of the objective, and performance m easure
         27.90      The work is expected to contribute to effective advocacy and knowledge -sharing, which would be
                    demonstrated by the increased usage of the main information platform, ReliefWeb.

Figure 27.X
Performance measure: increased use of ReliefWeb by global audience, 2017–2021
(Millions of pages views)



  14                                                                                                           13
                                                                                       12
  12
                                                                    10
  10                                          9

   8                 7
   6
   4
   2
   0
                   2017                      2018                   2019              2020                   2021



                    Legislative mandates

         27.91      The list below provides all mandates entrusted to the subprogramme.

General Assembly resolutions
46/182                   Strengthening of the coordination of         57/153        Strengthening the coordination of
                         humanitarian emergency assistance of the                   emergency humanitarian assistance of the
                         United Nations                                             United Nations
51/194                   Strengthening of the coordination of
                         emergency humanitarian assistance of the
                         United Nations




34/53                                                                                                                  20-05776
Section 27        Humanitarian assistance

                  Deliverables

        27.92     Table 27.11 lists all deliverables, by category and subcategory, for the period 2019 –2021 that
                  contributed and are expected to contribute to the attainment of the objective stated above.

Table 27.11
Subprogramme 5: deliverables for the period 2019–2021, by category and subcategory

Category and subcategory


C. Substantive deliverables
    Consultation, advice and advocacy: support for humanitarian partners to strengthen community engagement; authoritative,
    comprehensive information and analysis on humanitarian needs and response: consolidated information and analysis on crises
    and high-risk countries (e.g., multi-stakeholder inter-sectoral analysis outputs); and quality-assured data for use by operational
    partners.
    Databases and substantive digital materials: updating and maintenance of field guides, maps and other logistics information
    for humanitarian actors on the ground; establishment of information management standards for information exchange in the
    humanitarian community, reporting templates and guidance, including shared data standards among operational partners;
    databases and electronic tools related to humanitarian response and response coordination; International Search and Rescue
    Advisory Group urban search and rescue directory; and common risk and vulnerability assessment methodologies and tools.
D. Communication deliverables
    Outreach programmes, special events and information materials: information materials on advocacy on coordination of
    humanitarian action; organization of World Humanitarian Day and other real or virtual events on humanitarian issues and
    concerns, including exhibitions, seminars and public events, possibly through digital platforms; use of campaigns, special
    events and traditional and social media to advocate humanitarian issues and specific emergency situations.
    External and media relations: releases and briefings on the launch of the Global Humanitarian Overview (annual consolidated
    appeals) and on humanitarian emergencies; and field missions to highlight humanitarian issues and the work of the Office for the
    Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs with media representatives and advocates, depending on field travel.
    Digital platforms and multimedia content: manage and support humanitarian community digital platforms, such as
    ReliefWeb, humanitarianresponse.info and Humanitarian Data Exchange; guidance, templates and training on various reporting
    products, including situation report and humanitarian snapshot; and video and other multimedia content on international
    humanitarian law, international human rights law, humanitarian principles and pro tection of civilians, including gender-based
    violence in conflicts.
E. Enabling deliverables
    Information and communication technologies: product support for Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
    collaboration services and global information and communications technology group, information and communications
    technology emergency response and business continuity services, business intelligence and data analysis services.




20-05776                                                                                                                           35/53
Part VI             Humanitarian assistance

              B. Proposed post and non-post resource requirements for 2021
                    Overview

          27.93     The proposed regular budget resources for 2021, including the breakdown of resource changes, as
                    applicable, are reflected in tables 27.12 to 27.14.

Table 27.12
Financial resources
(Thousands of United States dollars)


                                                                                        Changes
                                                                                                                                2021                     2021
                                                                                 New/                                       estimate                 estimate
                                         2019            2020      Technical expanded                                        (before                    (after
                                   expenditure   appropriation   adjustments mandates     Other      Total   Percentage   recosting)   Recosting   recosting)


Posts                              12 792.8         12 943.1             –         –          –         –            – 12 943.1          368.4 13 311.5
Other staff costs                      4 505.4         6 787.9   (6 532.8)         –          – (6 532.8)       (96.2)      255.1           5.4       260.5
Hospitality                                 –            27.7       (21.0)         –          –    (21.0)       (75.8)          6.7         0.1          6.8
Consultants                              66.0              8.2        (8.2)        –          –     (8.2)     (100.0)             –           –             –
Experts                                     –            98.9       (98.9)         –          –    (98.9)     (100.0)             –           –             –
Travel of staff                         727.0           742.4      (383.9)         –          –   (383.9)       (51.7)      358.5           6.7       365.2
Contractual services                    872.7           530.8      (467.8)         –       90.6   (377.2)       (71.1)      153.6           3.3       156.9
General operating expenses             1 358.9         1 864.7   (1 610.2)         –          – (1 610.2)       (86.4)      254.5           5.5       260.0
Supplies and materials                  134.2            42.7       (35.0)         –          –    (35.0)       (82.0)          7.7         0.1          7.8
Furniture and equipment                    2.3          124.2       (81.4)         –          –    (81.4)       (65.5)        42.8          0.9        43.7
Improvements to premises                 78.2              3.0       (3.0)         –          –     (3.0)     (100.0)             –           –             –
Fellowships, grants
contributions                          2 354.4         1 950.4      (78.3)         –     (90.6)   (168.9)        (8.7)    1 781.5         33.9     1 815.4

      Total                        22 891.9         25 124.0     (9 320.5)         –          – (9 320.5)       (37.1) 15 803.5          424.3 16 227.8


Table 27.13
Post changes a

                                             Number      Level


Approved for 2020                                 72     1 USG, 1 ASG, 3 D-2, 4 D-1, 11 P-5, 16 P-4, 14 P-3, 5 P-2/1, 2 GS (PL), 15 GS (OL)
Proposed for 2021                                 72     1 USG, 1 ASG, 3 D-2, 4 D-1, 11 P-5, 16 P-4, 14 P-3, 5 P-2/1, 2 GS (PL), 15 GS (OL)

  a
      No post changes are proposed for 2021.




                    Note: The following abbreviations are used in tables and figures: ASG, Assistant Secretary -
                    General; GS, General Service; OL, Other level; PL, Principal level; USG, Under-Secretary-
                    General.

36/53                                                                                                                                               20-05776
Section 27           Humanitarian assistance

Table 27.14
Post resources

                                                                                                            Changes

                                                                    2020             Technical          New/expanded                                           2021
Category                                                        approved           adjustments              mandates             Other           Total     proposed

Professional and higher
    USG                                                                 1                     –                     –               –               –               1
    ASG                                                                 1                     –                     –               –               –               1
    D-2                                                                 3                     –                     –               –               –               3
    D-1                                                                 4                     –                     –               –               –               4
    P-5                                                                11                     –                     –               –               –             11
    P-4                                                                16                     –                     –               –               –             16
    P-3                                                                14                     –                     –               –               –             14
    P-2/1                                                               5                     –                     –                               –               5

    Subtotal                                                           55                     –                     –               –               –             55

General Service
    Principal level                                                     2                     –                     –               –               –               2
    Other level                                                        15                     –                     –               –               –             15

    Subtotal                                                           17                     –                     –               –               –             17

    Total                                                              72                     –                     –               –               –             72


          27.94      Additional details on the distribution of proposed resources for 2021 are reflected in tables 27.15 to
                     27.17 and figure 27.XI.
          27.95      As reflected in table 27.15 (1), the overall resources proposed for 2021 amount to $15,803,500 before
                     recosting, reflecting a net decrease of $9,320,500 (or 37.1 per cent) compared with the appropriation
                     for 2020. Resource changes result from technical adjustments relating to the removal of
                     non-recurrent requirements. The proposed level of resources provides for the full, efficient and
                     effective implementation of mandates.

Table 27.15
Evolution of financial resources by component and subprogramme
(Thousands of United States dollars)

              (1)    Regular budget

                                                                                              Changes
                                                                                                                                         2021                    2021
                                                                                       New/                                          estimate                estimate
                                                   2019          2020    Technical expanded                                           (before                   (after
                                             expenditure appropriation adjustments mandates       Other      Total Percentage      recosting) Recosting    recosting)


A. Executive direction and
   management                                  7 727.0       4 826.5   (2 843.5)          –          – (2 843.5)        (58.9)      1 983.0         57.2    2 040.2
B. Programme of work
    1.     Policy and analysis                   606.1         630.6           –          –          –          –           –            630.6      20.2       650.8
    2.     Coordination of humanitarian
           action and emergency response       4 516.9       5 429.5           –          –          –          –           –       5 429.5       152.5     5,582.0
    3.     Natural disaster risk reduction     1 246.7       1 264.4           –          –          –                              1 264.4         25.9    1 290.3
    4.     Emergency support services             42.3       3 133.6           –          –          –          –           –       3 133.6         81.3    3 214.9


20-05776                                                                                                                                                       37/53
Part VI             Humanitarian assistance


                                                                                             Changes
                                                                                                                                         2021                    2021
                                                                                      New/                                           estimate                estimate
                                                  2019          2020    Technical expanded                                            (before                   (after
                                            expenditure appropriation adjustments mandates     Other        Total Percentage       recosting) Recosting    recosting)


    5.    Humanitarian emergency
          information and advocacy            1 889.3       1 703.6           –          –         –           –             –      1 703.6       50.8      1 754.4
    6.    Office of the United Nations
          Emergency Ebola Response
          Coordinator                         5 448.7       6 477.0    (6 477.0)         –         – (6 477.0)          (100.0)           –          –              –

    Subtotal, B                              13 749.9      18 638.7    (6 477.0)         –         – (6 477.0)           (34.8)    12 161.7      330.7 12 492.4

C. Programme support                          1 415.0       1 658.8           –          –         –           –             –      1 658.8       36.4      1 695.2

    Subtotal, 1                              22 891.9      25 124.0    (9 320.5)         –         – (9 320.5)           (37.1)    15 803.5      424.3 16 227.8


             (2)    Extrabudgetary

                                                  2019          2020                                                                                            2021
                                            expenditure     estimate                                                                                        estimate


A. Executive direction and
   management                                 4 916.4       7 275.5                                                                                         7 566.5
B. Programme of work
    1.    Policy and analysis                 4 275.3         959.1                                                                                           959.1
    2.    Coordination of humanitarian
          action and emergency response 207 825.8         214 037.7                                                                                       214 037.7
    3.    Natural disaster risk reduction    30 706.0      46 991.5                                                                                        46 991.5
    4.    Emergency support services         21 205.3      23 861.8                                                                                        23 861.8
    5.    Humanitarian emergency
          information and advocacy           17 122.4      18 271.4                                                                                        18 271.4
    6.    Office of the United Nations
          Emergency Ebola Response
          Coordinator                                –            –                                                                                                 –

    Subtotal, B                             281 134.8     304 121.5                                                                                       314 563.2

C. Programme support                         20 928.1      21 490.2                                                                                        22 349.8

    Subtotal, 2                             306 979.3     332 887.2                                                                                       344 479.5

    Total                                   329 871.2     358 011.2                                                                                       360 707.3


Table 27.16
Evolution of post resources by component and subprogramme
             (1)    Regular budget

                                                                                                          Changes

                                                               2020              Technical             New/expanded                                            2021
                                                           approved            adjustments                 mandates               Other           Total    proposed


A. Executive direction and management                             8                     –                           –                –               –              8
B. Programme of work
    1.    Policy and analysis                                     3                     –                           –                –               –              3
    2.    Coordination of humanitarian action and
          emergency response                                     26                     –                           –                –               –            26


38/53                                                                                                                                                       20-05776
Section 27           Humanitarian assistance


                                                                                                      Changes

                                                                2020           Technical        New/expanded                                           2021
                                                            approved         adjustments            mandates               Other          Total    proposed


    3.     Natural disaster risk reduction                         1                  –                         –             –              –            1
    4.     Emergency support services                             17                  –                         –             –              –           17
    5.     Humanitarian emergency information and
           advocacy                                               10                  –                         –             –              –           10
    6.     Office of the United Nations Emergency
           Ebola Response Coordinator                              –                  –                         –             –              –            –

    Subtotal, B                                                   57                  –                         –             –              –           57

C. Programme support                                               7                  –                         –             –              –            7

    Subtotal, 1                                                   72                  –                         –             –              –           72


              (2)    Extrabudgetary

                                                                 2020                                                                                   2021
                                                             estimate                                                                               estimate


A. Executive direction and management                             25                                                                                     25
B. Programme of work
    1.     Policy and analysis                                     4                                                                                      4
    2.     Coordination of humanitarian action and
           emergency response                                  1 691                                                                                  1 691
    3.     Natural disaster risk reduction                       112                                                                                    112
    4.     Emergency support services                             87                                                                                     87
    5.     Humanitarian emergency information and
           advocacy                                               64                                                                                     64
    6.     Office of the United Nations Emergency
           Ebola Response Coordinator                              –                                                                                      –

    Subtotal, B                                                1 958                                                                                  1 958

C. Programme support                                              77                                                                                     77

    Subtotal, 2                                                2 060                                                                                  2 060

    Total                                                      2 132                                                                                  2 132


Table 27.17
Evolution of financial and post resources by category
(Thousands of United States dollars/number of posts)


                                                                                                  Changes
                                                                                                                                                        2021
                                                                                               New/                                                 estimate
                                               2019             2020      Technical        expanded                                                  (before
                                         expenditure    appropriation   adjustments        mandates         Other           Total   Percentage    recosting)


Financial resources by main category of expenditure
Post                                         12 792.8      12 943.1              –               –                  –          –            – 12 943.1
Non-post                                     10 099.1      12 180.9     (9 320.5)                –                  –   (9 320.5)      (76.5)      2 860.4

    Total                                    22 891.9      25 124.0     (9 320.5)                –                  –   (9 320.5)      (37.1) 15 803.5



20-05776                                                                                                                                              39/53
Part VI             Humanitarian assistance


                                                                                            Changes
                                                                                                                                         2021
                                                                                         New/                                        estimate
                                              2019             2020      Technical   expanded                                         (before
                                        expenditure    appropriation   adjustments   mandates         Other   Total   Percentage   recosting)


Post resources by category
Professional and higher                                          55             –          –             –       –            –           55
General Service and related                                      17             –          –             –       –            –           17

    Total                                                        72             –          –             –       –            –           72


Figure 27.XI
Distribution of proposed resources for 2021 (before recosting)
(Number of posts/thousands of United States dollars)




                    Variance analysis by component and subprogramme

                    Overall resource changes

                    Technical adjustments
        27.96       As reflected in table 27.15 (1), resource changes reflect a decrease of non -recurrent requirements
                    totalling $9,320,500 under executive direction and management and subprogramme 6, as follows:
                    (a)    Executive direction and management. The decrease of $2,843,500 results from the
                           discontinuation of the United Nations Monitoring Mechanism in the Syrian Arab Republic
                           pursuant to the decision by the Security Council in its resolution 2504 (2020) to extend the
                           mandate of the Mechanism until 10 July 2020. The reduction is reflected under other staff costs
                           ($2,205,400), hospitality ($500), consultants ($8,200), travel of staff ($238,000), contractual
                           services ($39,600), general operating expenses ($245,200), supplies and materials ($23,100),
                           furniture and equipment ($2,200), improvements to premises ($3,000), and fellowships, grants
                           and contributions ($78,300);



40/53                                                                                                                               20-05776
Section 27     Humanitarian assistance

               (b)   Subprogramme 6, Office of the United Nations Emergency Ebola Response Coordinator .
                     The decrease of $6,477,000 relates to the discontinuation of the Office of the United Nations
                     Emergency Ebola Response Coordinator. The reduction is reflected under other staff costs
                     ($4,327,400), hospitality ($20,500), consultants ($98,900), travel of s taff ($145,900),
                     contractual services ($428,200), general operating expenses ($1,365,000), supplies and
                     materials ($11,900) and furniture and equipment ($79,200) that were approved pursuant to
                     General Assembly resolution A/74/263.

               Extrabudgetary resources
       27.97   As reflected in tables 27.15 (2) and 27.16 (2), the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
               Affairs receives both cash and in-kind contributions, which complement regular budget resources
               and continue to be vital for the delivery of its mandates. In 2021, projected extrabudgetary resources
               (cash contributions) of $344,479,574, including 2,060 posts, will be focused on humanitarian
               assistance and disaster risk reduction activities. Extrabudgetary resources represent 95.5 per cent of
               the total resources for this programme. The estimates for extrabudgetary resources include the core
               requirements and programme support functions of the Office and the United Nations Office for
               Disaster Risk Reduction. The 2021 consolidated budget for section 27 will be submitted to the
               Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions for its consideration in October
               2020. Anticipated in-kind contributions will provide for rent-free premises with an estimated value
               of $59,622; technical assistance/expert services with an estimated value of $410,924; and
               administrative support with an estimated value of $18,188.

               Executive direction and management
       27.98   The role and functions of the Emergency Relief Coordinator were defined by the General Assembly
               in its resolution 46/182 and streamlined by the Assembly in resolution 52/12 and in the report of the
               Secretary-General on renewing the United Nations: a programme for reform ( A/51/950), in which
               he called for the strengthening of three core functions: policy development and coordination on
               humanitarian issues; advocacy of humanitarian issues with political organs; and coordination of
               humanitarian emergency response.
       27.99   The Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency Relief Coordinator provides
               overall direction, management and policy guidance to the offices in New York, Geneva and in the
               field. He provides leadership in the coordination of the overall response of the international
               community, in particular that of the United Nations system, to disasters and humanitarian
               emergencies; undertakes humanitarian diplomacy with Governments of affected countries, including
               the facilitation of access to emergency areas for the rapid delivery of humanitarian assistance;
               consults with the donor community and other interested States on issues rel ated to the provision of
               emergency humanitarian assistance; chairs the Inter-Agency Standing Committee and oversees the
               implementation of its decisions; manages the Central Emergency Response Fund and its loan
               component; mobilizes resources and support for emergency humanitarian programmes of the United
               Nations system; steers the development of policies for humanitarian assistance, in coordination with
               relevant partners; serves as the advocate for humanitarian issues on behalf of the United Nations
               system; and promotes better understanding by the public of humanitarian assistance issues. The
               Emergency Relief Coordinator acts as the main adviser of the Secretary -General on humanitarian
               issues and cooperates closely with other United Nations offices in the pla nning and coordination of
               United Nations humanitarian assistance activities in crisis situations. He also chairs the Executive
               Committee on Humanitarian Affairs. He is assisted by an Assistant Secretary -General for
               Humanitarian Affairs, who also acts as the Deputy Emergency Relief Coordinator.
      27.100   The offices in New York and Geneva support the Emergency Relief Coordinator. The New York
               office includes the Office of the Under-Secretary-General, which assists in the management of the
               Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs as a whole, ensuring complementarity of
               activities and close cooperation between the two offices.



20-05776                                                                                                        41/53
Part VI          Humanitarian assistance

        27.101   The Deputy Emergency Relief Coordinator, based in New York, assists the Executive Committee on
                 Humanitarian Affairs Coordinator in providing the overall direction, management and supervision
                 of the offices in New York and Geneva, as well as in supporting Office for the Coordination of
                 Humanitarian Affairs coordination in the field, and provides advice to the Emergency Reli ef
                 Coordinator on all matters relating to the mandate of the Office. The Deputy Emergency Relief
                 Coordinator interacts with Member States, intergovernmental organizations and NGOs, and
                 operational humanitarian agencies, as well as those departments of the Secretariat whose
                 responsibilities encompass peacekeeping and political and economic activities. The Deputy
                 Emergency Relief Coordinator also oversees the strategic planning and evaluation functions of the
                 Office, serves as the Chair of the Inter-Agency Standing Committee Working Group, acts on behalf
                 of the Coordinator in his absence and represents him, as required, in United Nations bodies,
                 organizations and conferences.
        27.102   The Director of the Operations and Advocacy Division is responsible for manag ement and oversight
                 of the humanitarian coordination leadership in the field, as well as for management of the field
                 operations. She leads the Inter-Agency Standing Committee Emergency Director Group on
                 operational issues and ensures the formulation of a coherent and timely United Nations response to
                 major and complex emergencies.
        27.103   The Director of the Humanitarian Financing and Resource Mobilization Division is responsible for
                 the humanitarian finances and resource mobilization functions. The Directo r of the Coordination
                 Division, based in Geneva, is responsible primarily for the emergency services managed by the
                 Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs on behalf of the United Nations system and for
                 managing relations with Member States, donors and partners.
        27.104   The secretariat of the Inter-Agency Standing Committee supports the Under-Secretary-General for
                 Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency Relief Coordinator in his capacity as Chair of the Committee and
                 supports the Deputy Emergency Relief Coordinator in his function as Chair of the Committee’s
                 Working Group. The secretariat facilitates the work of the Committee in relation to policy development
                 and advocacy in the humanitarian sector. It services the meetings of the Committee and its w orking
                 groups, supports the subsidiary bodies, maintains administrative and consultative communication
                 channels among the members and monitors implementation of the decisions of the Committee.
        27.105   In accordance with the 2030 Agenda, in particular target 12.6 of the Sustainable Development Goals,
                 in which organizations are encouraged to integrate sustainability information into their reporting
                 cycle, and in compliance with the cross-cutting mandate set out in paragraph 19 of General Assembly
                 resolution 72/219, the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs is integrating
                 environmental management practices into its operations. The Office has taken steps to reduce its
                 environmental footprint, in line with the Secretariat-wide initiatives to promote environmental
                 sustainability. Measures taken include waste management processes that promote recycling by
                 reducing the use of single use plastics and continuous guidance to countries on conducting
                 environmental impact assessments in humanitarian action.
        27.106   In 2021, the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs will systematically measure and
                 report on environmental performance, based on a mapping of material environmental impacts;
                 reduce adverse environmental impacts by implementing an environmental management system; and
                 maintain climate neutrality through a variety of initiatives. Such initiatives include increasing its use
                 of videoconference and remote meeting options, the consistent revie w of its vehicle fleet to ensure
                 that replacements are made only if required and the use of shared facilities when safe, practical and
                 in line with the humanitarian principles, in order to reduce its environmental footprint.
        27.107   Information on compliance with regard to the timely submission of documentation and advance
                 booking for air travel is reflected in table 27.18. The Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
                 Affairs will continue to implement the following measures to improve the compliance rat e of advance
                 purchase of air tickets: (a) advance planning and nomination of travellers; (b) on -boarding of staff
                 planned in advance with contingencies in place (e.g., advance request for visas); (c) undertaking
                 communications to staff and managers to raise awareness of the requirement; (d) minimizing instances
                 of exceptions; and (e) increasing its use of videoconference and remote meeting options.

42/53                                                                                                              20-05776
Section 27          Humanitarian assistance

Table 27.18
Compliance rate
(Percentage)


                                                                                     Planned 2019    Actual 2019       Planned 2020     Planned 2021


Timely submission of documentation                                                           100                 100            100              100
Air tickets purchased at least 2 weeks before the commencement of travel                     100                  68            100              100


       27.108       The proposed regular budget resources for 2021 amount to $1,983,000 and reflect a decrease of
                    $2,843,500 compared with the appropriation for 2020. The proposed decrease of $2,843,500 is
                    explained in paragraph 27.96 (a). Additional details on the distributi on of proposed resources for
                    2021 are reflected in table 27.19 and figure 27.XII.

Table 27.19
Executive direction and management: evolution of financial and post resources
(Thousands of United States dollars/number of posts)


                                                                                               Changes
                                                                                                                                                  2021
                                                                                           New/                                               estimate
                                              2019             2020      Technical     expanded                                                (before
                                        expenditure    appropriation   adjustments     mandates          Other         Total   Percentage   recosting)


Financial resources by main category of expenditure
Post                                      5 130.8          1 724.5              –             –             –             –            –     1 724.5
Non-post                                  2 596.2          3 102.0     (2 843.5)              –             –     (2 843.5)       (91.7)       258.5

    Total                                 7 727.0          4 826.5     (2 843.5)              –             –     (2 843.5)       (58.9)     1 983.0

Post resources by category
Professional and higher                                           6             –             –             –             –            –            6
General Service and related                                       2             –             –             –             –            –            2

    Total                                                         8             –             –             –             –            –            8




20-05776                                                                                                                                        43/53
Part VI              Humanitarian assistance

Figure 27.XII
Executive direction and management: distribution of proposed resources for 2021 (before recosting)
(Number of posts/thousands of United States dollars)




                     Programme of work

        27.109       The proposed regular budget resources for 2021 amount to $12,161,700 and reflect a decrease of
                     $6,477,000 compared with the appropriation for 2020. The proposed decrease of $6,477,000 is explained
                     in paragraph 27.96 (b). The distribution of resources by subprogramme is reflected in figure 27.XIII.

Figure 27.XIII
Distribution of proposed resources for 2021 by subprogramme
(Millions of United States dollars)




44/53                                                                                                              20-05776
Section 27          Humanitarian assistance

                    Subprogramme 1
                    Policy and analysis

       27.110       The proposed regular budget resources for 2021 amount to $630,600 and reflect no changes
                    compared with the appropriation for 2020. Additional details are reflected in table 27.20 and figure
                    27.XIV.

Table 27.20
Subprogramme 1: evolution of financial and post resources
(Thousands of United States dollars/number of posts)


                                                                                                              Changes
                                                                                                                                                    2021
                                                                                                       New/                                     estimate
                                                             2019            2020      Technical   expanded                                      (before
                                                       expenditure   appropriation   adjustments   mandates      Other   Total   Percentage   recosting)

Financial resources by main category of expenditure
Post                                                       606.0           630.6              –          –          –       –            –       630.6
Non-post                                                      0.1               –             –          –          –       –            –            –
    Total                                                  606.1           630.6              –          –          –       –            –       630.6
Post resources by category
Professional and higher                                                         3             –          –          –       –            –            3
General Service and related                                                     –             –          –          –       –            –            –
    Total                                                                       3             –          –          –       –            –            3


Figure 27.XIV
Subprogramme 1: distribution of proposed resources for 2021 (before recosting)
(Number of posts/thousands of United States dollars)




20-05776                                                                                                                                         45/53
Part VI             Humanitarian assistance

                    Subprogramme 2
                    Coordination of humanitarian action and emergency response

        27.111      The proposed regular budget resources for 2021 amount to $5,429,500 and reflect no resource change
                    compared with the appropriation for 2020. Additional details on the distribution of resources in 2021
                    are reflected in table 27.21 and figure 27.XV.

Table 27.21
Subprogramme 2: evolution of financial and post resources
(Thousands of United States dollars/number of posts)


                                                                                                              Changes
                                                                                                                                                   2021
                                                                                                       New/                                    estimate
                                                             2019            2020      Technical   expanded                                     (before
                                                       expenditure   appropriation   adjustments   mandates     Other   Total   Percentage   recosting)

Financial resources by main category of expenditure
Post                                                     4 000.2         4 692.7              –          –          –      –            –     4 692.7
Non-post                                                   516.7           736.8              –          –          –      –            –       736.8
    Total                                                4 516.9         5 429.5              –          –          –      –            –     5 429.5
Post resources by category
Professional and higher                                                        21             –          –          –      –            –           21
General Service and related                                                     5             –          –          –      –            –            5
    Total                                                                      26             –          –          –      –            –           26


Figure 27.XV
Subprogramme 2: distribution of proposed resources for 2021 (before recosting)
(Number of posts/thousands of United States dollars)




46/53                                                                                                                                          20-05776
Section 27          Humanitarian assistance

                    Subprogramme 3
                    Natural disaster risk reduction

       27.112       The proposed regular budget resources for 2021 amount to $1,264,400 and reflect no change in
                    resource level compared with the appropriation for 2020. Additional details are reflected in table
                    27.22 and figure 27.XVI.

Table 27.22
Subprogramme 3: evolution of financial and post resources
(Thousands of United States dollars/number of posts)


                                                                                                               Changes
                                                                                                                                                          2021
                                                                                                        New/                                          estimate
                                                             2019            2020      Technical    expanded                                           (before
                                                       expenditure   appropriation   adjustments    mandates     Other       Total   Percentage     recosting)

Financial resources by main category of expenditure
Post                                                       224.1           181.4                –         –          –           –             –       181.4
Non-post                                                 1 022.6         1 083.0                –         –          –           –             –     1 083.0
    Total                                                1 246.7         1 264.4                –         –          –           –             –     1 264.4
Post resources by category
Professional and higher                                                          1              –         –          –           –             –             1
General Service and related                                                      –              –         –          –           –             –             –
    Total                                                                        1              –         –          –           –             –             1


Figure 27.XVI
Subprogramme 3: distribution of proposed resources for 2021 (before recosting)
(Number of posts/thousands of United States dollars)

             Distribution of posts         Distribution of financial resources             Distribution of non-post financial resources
                     1 post                             $1 264.4                                             $1 083.0



                                                                                          1.8                        Contractual services




                                                                                         14.1                        General operating expenses

           D-1     1                         Post                     Non-post
                                             181.4                     1 083.0

                                                                                          0.5                        Supplies and materials




                                                                                         1 066.6                     Fellowships, grants and contributions




20-05776                                                                                                                                                 47/53
Part VI             Humanitarian assistance

                    Subprogramme 4
                    Emergency support services

        27.113      The proposed regular budget resources for 2021 amount to $3,133,600 and reflect no change in
                    resource level compared with the appropriation for 2020. Additional details are reflected in table
                    27.23 and figure 27.XVII.

Table 27.23
Subprogramme 4: evolution of financial and post resources
(Thousands of United States dollars/number of posts)


                                                                                                              Changes
                                                                                                                                                   2021
                                                                                                       New/                                    estimate
                                                             2019            2020      Technical   expanded                                     (before
                                                       expenditure   appropriation   adjustments   mandates     Other   Total   Percentage   recosting)

Financial resources by main category of expenditure
Post                                                         40.3        3 057.8              –          –          –      –            –     3 057.8
Non-post                                                      2.0            75.8             –          –          –      –            –        75.8
    Total                                                    42.3        3 133.6              –          –          –      –            –     3 133.6
Post resources by category
Professional and higher                                                        14             –          –          –      –            –           14
General Service and related                                                     3             –          –          –      –            –            3
    Total                                                                      17             –          –          –      –            –           17


Figure 27.XVII
Subprogramme 4: distribution of proposed resources for 2021 (before recosting)
(Number of posts/thousands of United States dollars)




48/53                                                                                                                                          20-05776
Section 27          Humanitarian assistance

                    Subprogramme 5
                    Humanitarian emergency information and advocacy

       27.114       The proposed regular budget resources for 2021 amount to $1,703,600 and reflect no change in
                    resource level compared with the appropriation for 2020. Additional details are reflected in table
                    27.24 and figure 27.XVIII.

Table 27.24
Subprogramme 5: evolution of financial and post resources
(Thousands of United States dollars/number of posts)


                                                                                                              Changes
                                                                                                                                                   2021
                                                                                                       New/                                    estimate
                                                             2019            2020      Technical   expanded                                     (before
                                                       expenditure   appropriation   adjustments   mandates     Other   Total   Percentage   recosting)

Financial resources by main category of expenditure
Post                                                     1 886.5         1 703.6              –          –          –      –            –     1 703.6
Non-post                                                      2.8               –             –          –          –      –            –            –
    Total                                                1 889.3         1 703.6              –          –          –      –            –     1 703.6

Post resources by category
Professional and higher                                                         7             –          –          –      –            –            7
General Service and related                                                     3             –          –          –      –            –            3
    Total                                                                      10             –          –          –      –            –           10


Figure 27.XVIII
Subprogramme 5: distribution of proposed resources for 2021 (before recosting)
(Number of posts/thousands of United States dollars)




20-05776                                                                                                                                         49/53
Part VI             Humanitarian assistance

                    Subprogramme 6
                    Office of the United Nations Emergency Ebola
                    Response Coordinator

        27.115      Resource changes reflect the proposed decrease of $6,477,000 or 100 per cent of the appropriation
                    for 2020, as reflected in table 27.25. The proposed decrease of $6,477,000 is explained in paragraph
                    27.96 (b).

Table 27.25
Subprogramme 6: evolution of financial and post resources
(Thousands of United States dollars/number of posts)


                                                                                                              Changes
                                                                                                                                                      2021
                                                                                                       New/                                       estimate
                                                             2019            2020      Technical   expanded                                        (before
                                                       expenditure   appropriation   adjustments   mandates     Other      Total   Percentage   recosting)

Financial resources by main category of expenditure
Post                                                            –               –             –          –          –         –            –            –
Non-post                                                 5 448.7         6 477.0     (6 477.0)           –          – (6 477.0)     (100.0)             –
    Total                                                5 448.7         6 477.0     (6 477.0)           –          – (6 477.0)     (100.0)             –

Post resources by category
Professional and higher                                                         –             –          –          –         –            –            –
General Service and related                                                     –             –          –          –         –            –            –
    Total                                                                       –             –          –          –         –            –            –



                    Programme support

        27.116      The Executive Office of the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs comprises two
                    branches: one in New York and one in Geneva. The branches are responsible for performing
                    administrative functions, including those relating to finance and budget, human resources and staff
                    development and training, and for providing administrative support and guidance to s taff members.
        27.117      The Executive Office in New York oversees the financial, human resources and general
                    administration of the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs and provides guidance on
                    administrative matters. It supports senior management in formulating policies and instructions,
                    including on financial management, workforce planning, rostering and staff development and
                    training. It coordinates departmental programme budgets and presentations to legislative bodies.
        27.118      Under the overall direction of the head of the Executive Office, the Geneva branch manages the
                    receipt and expenditure of funds, supports the procurement of goods and services and undertakes the
                    recruitment, deployment and administration of field staff.
        27.119      During fiscal year 2021, the Executive Office will continue to focus on workforce and succession
                    planning, as well as career and staff development, in line with the human resources strategy. It will
                    also improve financial monitoring and projections of funding requ irements for future budgets,
                    managing and effectively utilizing resources, capturing and sharing field information and ensuring
                    the accurate and timely reporting of financial transactions. As part of those efforts, the Executive
                    Office will continuously focus on enhancing the service orientation and client focus of its
                    administrative support.
        27.120      The proposed regular budget resources for 2021 amount to $1,658,800 and reflect no change in the
                    resource level compared with the appropriation for 2020. Additional details are reflected in table
                    27.26 and figure 27.XIX.


50/53                                                                                                                                             20-05776
Section 27          Humanitarian assistance

Table 27.26
Programme support: evolution of financial and post resources
(Thousands of United States dollars/number of posts)


                                                                                                              Changes
                                                                                                                                                   2021
                                                                                                       New/                                    estimate
                                                             2019            2020      Technical   expanded                                     (before
                                                       expenditure   appropriation   adjustments   mandates     Other   Total   Percentage   recosting)


Financial resources by main category of expenditure
Post                                                       904.9           952.5              –          –          –      –            –       952.5
Non-post                                                   510.1           706.3              –          –          –      –            –       706.3

    Total                                                1 415.0         1 658.8              –          –          –      –            –     1 658.8

Post resources by category
Professional and higher                                                         3             –          –          –      –            –            3
General Service and related                                                     4             –          –          –      –            –            4

    Total                                                                       7             –          –          –      –            –            7


Figure 27.XIX
Programme support: distribution of proposed resources for 2021 (before recosting)
(Number of posts/thousands of United States dollars)




20-05776                                                                                                                                         51/53
Part VI                 Humanitarian assistance

Annex I
                        Organizational structure and post distribution for 2021

                                                                                               Office of the Under-Secretary-
                                                                                                General for Humanitarian
                                                                                               Affairs and Emergency Relief
                                                                                                         Coordinator
                                         Internally                                                                                      Strategy Planning,
             Secretariat of
                                         Displaced          Strategic Communications                                                       Evaluation and
        International Strategy                                                                  RB:             XB:
                                        Persons Unit                  Branch                                                             Guidance Section
        for Disaster Reduction                                  (subprogramme 5)a               1 USG           1 P-4
           (subprogramme 3)              XB:                                                    1 P-5           1 GS (OL)                RB:       XB:
                                         1 D-1               RB:            XB:                 1 P-3                                    2 P-5     4 P-4
        RB:      XB:                     1 P-5               1 D-1          2 P-5               2 GS (OL)                                          1 P-3
        1 D-1    1 ASG                   4 P-4               1 P-4          6 P-4                                                                  1 GS (OL)
                 1 D-2                   2 P-3               1 P-3          11 P-3
                 3 D-1                   3 GS (OL)                          2 GS (OL)                                                     Organizational
                 12 P-5                                                                                                                  Development Unit
                 25 P-4
                 31 P-3                                                                  Office of the Assistant Secretary-                      XB:
                 1 P-2                                                                 General and Deputy Emergency Relief                       1 P-5
                 1 GS (PL)                                                                          Coordinator                                  1 P-4
                 14 GS (OL)
                 17 LL                                                                         RB:      XB:
                                                                                               1 ASG    1 P-4                               Gender Unit
                 6 NPO
                                                                                                        1 P-3                                    XB:
                                                                                                        1 GS (OL)
                                                                                                                                                 1 P-5




                  Policy Branch                           Operations and              Coordination Division                 Information
                (subprogramme 1)                                                        (subprogramme 4)                Management Branch
                                                         Advocacy Division
                                                                                                                         (subprogramme 5)
                                                         (subprogramme 2)
                RB:       XB:                                                         RB:       XB:
                1 D-1     2 P-4                                                       1 D-2     2 D-1                  RB:         XB:
                                                        RB:          XB:
                1 P-4     1 P-3                                                       1 D-1     10 P-5                 1 P-5       1 D-1
                                                        1 D-2        5 D-1
                1 P-3     1 GS (OL)                                                   2 P-5     29 P-4                 2 P-4       2 P-5
                                                        4 P-5        10 P-5
                                                                                      3 P-4     19 P-3                 1 P-3       13 P-4
                                                        8 P-4        18 P-4
                                                                                      5 P-3     1 P-2                  3 GS (OL)   11 P-3
                                                        4 P-3        12 P-3
                                                                                      2 P-2     26 GS (OL)                         16 GS (OL)
                                                        2 P-2        5 GS (OL)
                                                                                      1 GS (PL)
                                                        4 GS (OL)
                                                                                      2 GS (OL)



                             Executive Office          Regional, Field and Disaster                 Humanitarian Financing
                          (New York and Geneva)         Response Adviser offices                        and Resource
                                                           (subprogramme 2)
                                                                                                     Mobilization Division
                          RB:         XB:
                                                              XB:                                     (subprogramme 2)
                          1 P-5       1 D-1
                          1 P-3       2 P-5                   20 D-1
                                                              53 P-5                                RB:         XB:
                          1 P-2       12 P-4
                                                              155 P-4                               1 D-2       2 D-1
                          1 GS (PL)   23 P-3
                                                              173 P-3                               1 P-4       8 P-5
                          3 GS (OL)   1 P-2
                                                              25 P-2                                1 GS (OL)   23 P-4
                                      38 GS (OL)
                                                              647 GS (OL)                                       31 P-3
                                                              475 NPO                                           2 P-2
                                                                                                                27 GS (OL)


Abbreviations: ASG, Assistant Secretary-General; GS (OL), General Service (Other level); GS (PL), General Service (Principal level); LL, Local level;
    NPO, National Professional Officer; RB, regular budget; USG, Under-Secretary-General; XB, extrabudgetary.
  a
    The Strategic Communications Branch is presented under subprogramme 5, but reports under executive direction and management.




52/53                                                                                                                                                      20-05776
Section 27         Humanitarian assistance

Annex II
                   Summary of follow-up action taken to implement relevant
                   recommendations of the oversight bodies
Brief description of the recommendation                    Action taken to implement the recommendation


Board of Auditors (A/74/5 (Vol. I))
The Board reiterates the recommendation that sustained     The Administration accepted the recommendation and
efforts are needed to ensure timely receipt of financial   stated that, to support the timely receipt of reports, an
and programmatic reports for effective monitoring of       automated reminder would be sent to partners when
implementing partners (para. 453).                         reports are past due.

The Board recommends that the Administration               While agreeing with the recommendation, the
continue to proactively advocate increase of multi-year    Administration stated that increasing multi-year
funding for more predictable financial resources and set   funding was a part of the Office for the Coordination
targets for unearmarked funding for more focused           of Humanitarian Affairs resource mobilization strategy
efforts (para. 426).                                       for 2018–2021.

The Board recommends that sustained efforts be made        The Administration agreed with the recommendation
to improve monitoring visits and financial spot check s    and stated that, to address the inconsistent compliance
to carry out important assurance and monitoring            with the guidelines, it would assume full
activities over the implementing partners (para. 443).     responsibility of funds on 1 January 2020 and would
                                                           continue to work on strengthening monitoring and
                                                           financial spot checks.

The Board recommends that the Administration prepare       The Administration is fully committed to migrating to
a definite plan with clear timelines for migration to      Umoja when Office for the Coordination of
Umoja Extension 2 functionalities to eliminate             Humanitarian Affairs requirements are in place. In the
duplication of efforts and investments in software         meantime, and until such requirements are met, there
systems (para. 480).                                       should be data-sharing between the two systems to
                                                           eliminate the duplication of effort.
The Board also recommends that the Administration          The Administration stated that it was fully committed
ensure a timely updating of accurate and complete          to migrating to Umoja when Office for the
information in grant management system and identify        Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs requirements
the requirements for inclusion in the ongoing exercise     are in place. In the meantime, and until such
of Umoja Extension 2 to ensure that the new                requirements are met, there should be data-sharing
functionalities can cater to the requirements for          between the grant management system and the Umoja
management of multi partner pooled funds (para. 481).
                                                           Extension 2 system to eliminate the duplication of
                                                           effort. It also stated that the Office would consolidate
                                                           all country-based pooled funds under the single
                                                           management arrangement performed by the Office as
                                                           of 1 January 2020.




20-05776                                                                                                        53/53
