[Extract: chapter on Programme 23, Humanitarian assistance, from A/75/16 (Report of the Committee for Programme and Coordination). Lines 5719-5894 of the full pdftotext -layout output; the rest of the report is not reproduced.]

           Programme 23
           Humanitarian assistance

           510. During its sixtieth session, the Committee considered programme 23,
           Humanitarian assistance, of the proposed programme plan for 2021 and programme
           performance information for 2019 (A/75/6 (Sect. 27) and A/75/6 (Sect. 27)/Corr.1).
           511. The representative of the Secretary-General introduced the programme and,
           together with other representatives, responded to questions raised during its
           consideration by the Committee.

           Discussion
           512. Delegations expressed broad support for the work carried out by the Office for
           the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, with a delegation highlighting in particular
           the focus on improving humanitarian policy, emergency response, humanitarian
           access, the humanitarian and peace nexus, the enhanced Global Humanitarian
           Overview, improved disaster risk reduction and anticipatory action and preparedness
           that would make the humanitarian response system more effective, faster, be of better
           value, save more lives and would pre-empt suffering by shifting from a reactive to a
           proactive approach.
           513. A delegation acknowledged the efforts made by the Secretariat in improving the
           programme narrative, taking into account the comments provided at the fifty -ninth
           session of the Committee; however, it also noted that there remained a lack of
           consistency between the language used in the document and the agreed language of

20-09167                                                                                            107/135
A/75/16

           relevant General Assembly and Economic and Social Council resolutions. In that
           regard, the delegation emphasized the need to ensure that the language included in
           the document represented agreed language approved in various resolutions. The
           examples provided by the delegation of “controversial connotations” included: (a) the
           use of the word “marginalized” in paragraph 27.3, which, it expressed the view, would
           be better represented by “most vulnerable”; and (b) the use of the terms “inclusivity”,
           “other diversity dimensions”, “specific population groups” and “enhanced approach”
           in paragraph 27.33, which the delegation considered to be controversial and not
           universally agreed terms.
           514. Clarifications were sought regarding the mandates for some of the activities
           reflected in the programme. A delegation noted that some of the activities were not
           mandated and provided a number of examples, which included: (a) the use of the phrase
           “advocate the rights of people in need” in paragraph 27.7; (b) the reference to the work
           of the Office, which “supported the development of strategies to overcome access
           constraints in relevant operations”, in paragraph 27.22, and the example cited in the
           same paragraph on South Sudan; (c) the programme performance information reported
           in 2019 under subprogramme 2, Coordination of humanitarian action and emergency
           response, which referred to its work on increased availability of resources combating
           sexual and gender-based violence in humanitarian crises; (d) the reference made in
           paragraph 27.50 to the “development of joint recommendations on how displacement
           can be featured in national disaster risk reduction strategies and plans and the
           production of guidance on how to reduce disaster displacement risk and strengthen
           resilience”; and (e) the use of the word “major” in the sentence ending “and timely
           United Nations response to major and complex emergencies” in paragraph 27.102.
           515. In reference to paragraph 27.5, delegations expressed concerns regarding the
           impact that the COVID-19 would have on the operations of the Office, especially in the
           field, and on the programme plans for 2020 and 2021. It was noted that humanitarian
           and health-care workers faced a new risk calculus, planning requirements and challenges
           to access, particularly amid the COVID-19 pandemic. Clarification was sought
           regarding the actions the Office was taking to address the unique access challenges amid
           the border, curfew and other access restrictions related to the pandemic and to overcome
           supply chain challenges, and the contingency plans the Office had developed, noting that
           the pandemic had had a negative impact on its partners and staffing.
           516. A delegation sought clarification on the reference to “and facilitate sustainable
           solutions” in paragraph 27.7, and the term “human vulnerability” in paragraph 27.9.
           The view was expressed that some of the terms used were too broad and a n umber of
           examples were provided, which included the text in paragraph 27.7, where the
           delegation was of the view that the sentence
                To fulfil its mandate, the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
                will continue to support Member States in coordinating effective and principled
                humanitarian action in partnership with national and international actors, in
                order to alleviate human suffering in disasters and complex emergencies;
                advocate the rights of people in need; promote preparedness and preven tion; and
                facilitate sustainable solutions.
           should be revised as follows:
                To fulfil its mandate, the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
                would continue to support Member States in coordinating effective and principled
                humanitarian assistance in partnership with national and international
                humanitarian and other relevant actors, respecting the United Nations guiding
                principles of humanitarian assistance, in order to alleviate human suffering in
                natural disasters and complex emergencies; promote preparedness and prevention.


 108/135                                                                                              20-09167
                                                                                                       A/75/16

           517. Regarding paragraph 27.12, a delegation sought clarification on how the Office
           was working to establish functional and realistic coordination of humanitarian,
           development and peacebuilding efforts. Clarification was also sought on the lessons
           learned and value-added areas and tools, such as cross-sectoral co-planning, needs
           analyses and civil-military coordination, which could be used for further and more
           regular integration and collaboration. Similar references to colla boration were noted
           in paragraphs 27.20 and 27.101.
           518. In paragraph 27.20, it was mentioned that the subprogramme would identify
           policy and programmatic solutions and best practice and innovative concepts that
           should be disseminated widely to inform and guide policy, operational decisions and
           crisis management. A delegation cautioned that, when discussing innovative concepts,
           it was not always known what those innovative concepts would be, so it was important
           to take into account the considerations of Member States before disseminating those
           innovative concepts widely to guide policy.
           519. Another delegation urged the Office to maintain its leadership in the field of
           humanitarian access, which it highlighted was a core element of the mandate. The
           same delegation sought clarification on how the Office would ensure that the minimum
           package of services on access was responsive to the needs of its partners, as mentioned
           in paragraph 27.22. In that same paragraph, where it was mentioned that the Office
           supported the development of strategies to overcome access constraints in relevant
           operations, another delegation questioned what the mandate of the Office was for those
           activities, and sought further details on the example citing South Sudan and what had
           been done there. In reference to paragraph 27.23, clarification was sought on what the
           numerous contributing factors were that facilitated access to people in need.
           520. With regard to result 2: how technology may shape the humanitarian operating
           environment, and paragraph 27.25, clarification was sought regarding the ways in
           which technology could shape the humanitarian environment, why technology was a
           priority for 2021 and how the specific gaps in humanitarian responses could
           effectively benefit from new technology approaches. Regarding the performance
           measures set out in table 27.2, the view was expressed that the phrase “increased use
           of strategic technologies by humanitarian actors in 2021” was too broad and general,
           and clarification was sought on the plan to measure increased use of technology by
           humanitarian actors. Concerns were expressed regarding the references to how
           technology could be used to make humanitarian action more effective and efficient
           (see para. 27.28) and the use of mobile phones and social media tools to enhance
           activities (see para. 27.29), especially for the most vulnerable populations, who do
           not have access to those technologies.
           521. Regarding subprogramme 2, Coordination of humanitarian action and emergency
           response, a delegation expressed its view that the reference to the Central Emergency
           Relief Fund in paragraph 27.35 should have read Central Emergency Response Fund.
           Regarding planned result 1: increased use of humanitarian funding for early action, and
           the activities mentioned in paragraph 27.42, a delegation expressed its view that, while
           innovative approaches to addressing needs early was encouraged, pooled funds should
           first and foremost remain available to respond to urgent needs stemming from sudden
           onset disasters and critical gaps in resources to address needs related to underfunded
           responses. Some delegations welcomed the new result 2: an enhanced Global
           Humanitarian Overview, and the focus on data transparency, joint needs analysis and
           response prioritization. Clarification was sought on how the Office planned to improve
           the engagement of other United Nations entities, which have their own specific
           mandates, appeals and response strategies. Clarification was also sought regarding the
           steps taken by the Office to help improve the collection and sharing of data across
           clusters in a crisis zone and the analysis of data that would enable the improved


20-09167                                                                                              109/135
A/75/16

           prioritization and identification of groups or emergencies that would have the most
           urgent and unmet needs, as alluded to in paragraphs 27.44 and 27.87.
           522. Under subprogramme 3, Natural disaster risk reduction, a delegation expressed
           the view that the strategy of the subprogramme, as set out in paragraph 27.50,
           contained too many broad results, which made it difficult to comprehe nd the work of
           the Office. Clarification was sought by a delegation on the work undertaken to
           promote the all-of-society approach referred to in paragraph 27.50. Clarification and
           examples were also sought on the “impactful disaster risk reduction policies and
           interventions to be developed” referred to in paragraph 27.52.
           523. Regarding subprogramme 4, Emergency support services, a delegation
           expressed its doubts regarding the legality of the engagement between humanitarian
           and armed actors referred to in paragraph 27.66. The same delegation expressed its
           view that the term “sudden onset” used in relation to emergencies and crises referred
           to in paragraphs 27.73, 27.85 and 27.88 should be revised to “sudden and slow onset”.
           524. Under subprogramme 5, Humanitarian emergency information and advocacy, a
           delegation sought clarification on the definition of the types of audiences referred to
           in paragraph 27.82. The delegation also sought clarification on the definition of
           “humanitarian users” in paragraph 27.88 and the phrase “use of shared facilitates
           when safe, practical and in line with the humanitarian principles” in paragraph
           27.106. A delegation expressed its view that the term “disasters and … emergencies”
           used in paragraphs 27.83, 27.85 and 27.99 should be revised to “natural disasters and
           complex emergencies”. Also in paragraph 27.99, the view was expressed that the word
           “rapid” should be replaced with “timely”.
           525. It was noted that results 1 and 2 reported under subprogramme 5, Humanitarian
           emergency information and advocacy, were similar in nature. The view was expressed
           that, given the limited number of results in the format, it would be good to avoid
           overlap in presenting results and show different aspects of the work of the
           subprogrammes.

           Conclusions and recommendations
           526. Owing to a shortage of time, the Committee recommended that the General
           Assembly review, at its seventy-fifth session, the programme plan of programme
           23, Humanitarian assistance, of the proposed programme budget for 2021, under
           the agenda item entitled “Programme planning”.
