                United Nations                                                                                                                A/76/6 (Sect. 27)
                General Assembly                                                                                   Distr.: General
                                                                                                                   8 April 2021

                                                                                                                   Original: English




Seventy-sixth session
Items 140 and 141 of the preliminary list*
Proposed programme budget for 2022
Programme planning


                Proposed programme budget for 2022
                Part VI
                Humanitarian assistance

                Section 27
                Humanitarian assistance
                Programme 23
                Humanitarian assistance


Contents
                                                                                                                                                                     Page

                Foreword . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     3
                A.     Proposed programme plan for 2022 and programme performance for 2020 ** . . . . . . . . .                                                        4
                B.     Proposed post and non-post resource requirements for 2022*** . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .                                           43
                       Annexes
                        I.    Organizational structure and post distribution for 2022 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .                                 65
                      II.     Summary of follow-up action taken to implement relevant recommendations of the
                              oversight bodies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        66




            * A/76/50.
           ** In keeping with paragraph 11 of resolution 72/266 A, the part consisting of the programme plan
              and programme performance information is submitted through the Committee for Programme and
              Coordination for the consideration of the General Assembly.
          *** In keeping with paragraph 11 of resolution 72/266 A, the part consisting of the post and non-post
              resource requirements is submitted through the Advisory Committee on Administrative and
              Budgetary Questions for the consideration of the General Assembly.


 21-04597 (E)        140521
 *2104597*
Foreword
      Over the next 12 months, 235 million people worldwide will need humanitarian assistance and protection –
an increase of 40 per cent compared with last year. This spike in needs has been driven by the coronavirus disease
(COVID-19) pandemic, which, when added to ongoing conflict, climate change and natural disasters, has pushed
millions to the brink.
      In 2020 we saw the COVID-19 pandemic wreak havoc on human health; deepen poverty, inequality and
hunger; overwhelm health infrastructure; and overturn socioec onomic systems. The long-term socioeconomic
effects are likely to continue in 2022, resulting in a negative impact on humanitarian needs in various sectors
beyond the health sector.
      Evidence shows that, with the record $17 billion provided by internation al donors in 2020, humanitarians
could reach 70 per cent of those targeted with some form of life -saving aid. Much of the humanitarian response
was delivered in time, thanks to local and national organizations that worked on the front lines despite increas ed
access restrictions. Humanitarian organizations went to great lengths to meet the diverse needs of all groups,
including women and girls, older persons and people living with disabilities. The year 2020 also saw a global effort
to scale up anticipatory and early action with a view to mitigating the impacts of impending humanitarian crises.
      Current United Nations-coordinated humanitarian response plans aim at reaching 160 million of those who
most need humanitarian assistance and protection in 56 countr ies, at a cost of $35 billion. Priorities for humanitarian
assistance in the near future, including 2022, will include fighting off famine; vaccinating children; addressing
protection needs, especially for women and children; supporting survivors of gender-based violence; providing
emergency education; and lessening the blow of mounting poverty. The full funding of humanitarian response plans
is a prerequisite for success on all of these fronts, and efforts to mobilize more resources for effective future
response will be intensified.
      Solutions that ensure no one is left behind, and that go beyond humanitarian assistance by collaborating with
development partners and other stakeholders to ensure a smooth transition from relief to development, will continue
to be explored with Member States. Beyond humanitarian assistance, swift action to stem the climate crisis and a
vigorous collective push for peace and reconciliation and achieve a global ceasefire are needed.
      The decisions the international community takes now will have consequences for decades.


                                                                                          (Signed) Mark Lowcock
                                                                  Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs
                                                                                and Emergency Relief Coordinator




21-04597                                                                                                            3/67
Part VI          Humanitarian assistance

           A. Proposed programme plan for 2022 and programme performance
              for 2020
                 Overall orientation
                 Mandates and background

          27.1   The mandate derives from the priorities established in relevant General Assembly resolutions and
                 decisions, including resolution 46/182, in which the Assembly set out the guiding principles of
                 humanitarian response and affirmed the leadership role of the Secretary -General to ensure better
                 preparation and effective response to natural disasters and other complex emergencies. This mandate
                 has been confirmed and consolidated through the normative developments of various resolutions
                 over the past 26 years. The Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs is responsible for
                 ensuring the timely, coherent, coordinated and principled response of the internationa l community
                 to natural disasters and complex emergencies and for facilitating the transition from emergency relief
                 to rehabilitation and sustainable development. With an unprecedented number of people in need and
                 extreme poverty and hunger on the rise, owing to the compounded effects of prolonged conflict, the
                 intensifying effects of climate change and the direct and indirect impact of the coronavirus disease
                 (COVID-19) pandemic, ensuring well-coordinated and principled humanitarian action by the
                 international community remains as important as ever.
          27.2   The United Nations Office for Disaster Risk Reduction is responsible for leading and ensuring
                 synergies among the disaster reduction activities of the United Nations system and regional
                 organizations and activities in socioeconomic and humanitarian fields. It provides a data -driven,
                 people-centric approach to supporting governments and stakeholders in the identification and
                 reporting of relevant ongoing and emerging disaster risks. The mandate derives from the priorities
                 established in relevant General Assembly resolutions and decisions, including resolution 56/195, as
                 well as the Sendai Declaration and the Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction 2015 –2030.
                 In order to implement its mandate, in line with its strategic framework for the period 2022 –2025,
                 the Office intends to support national and local implementation of the Sendai Framework,
                 strengthening global monitoring and analysis of disaster risk, c atalysing action through countries
                 and partners and promoting effective risk communication, advocacy and knowledge management.


                 Strategy and external factors for 2022

          27.3   In 2020, the COVID-19 pandemic compounded the already intensifying effects of prolonged conflict
                 and consequences of other disasters. Recent trends included a rise in extreme poverty rates for the
                 first time in 22 years, a rise in hunger and food insecurity worldwide, the exacerbation of
                 vulnerability and an increase in the number of internally displaced persons. The number of people
                 in need of humanitarian assistance grew to 1 in 33 people worldwide by the end of 2020, compared
                 with 1 in 45 people in 2019.
          27.4   In the face of these challenges, the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs will continue
                 to enhance the coordination and effective and efficient provision of humanitarian assistance together
                 with humanitarian organizations. To this end, the Office will continue to develop and promote a
                 common policy on humanitarian issues for the United Nations system and its partners; mobilize and
                 coordinate assistance in humanitarian emergencies; mobilize United Nations capacity to expedite the
                 provision of international humanitarian assistance; strengthen early action and anticipatory
                 approaches; advocate for and contribute to stronger preparedness for more timely humanitarian
                 assistance in emergencies; advocate on humanitarian issues; and strengthen analysis and availability
                 of timely information on emergencies and natural disasters, in accordance with its mandate. The Office
                 will also support the mobilization of resources to enable early action and a prompt response to new or
                 rapidly deteriorating humanitarian emergencies. The Office will continue to strengthen partnerships at
                 the global, regional, national and local levels in support of national efforts to effectively provide


4/67                                                                                                            21-04597
Section 27        Humanitarian assistance

                  humanitarian assistance to those in need. The Office will also collaborate with other relevant United
                  Nations and intergovernmental organizations and development partners to enhance coherence and
                  complementarity in ways that are supportive of recovery and longer-term sustainable development.
           27.5   The United Nations Office for Disaster Risk Reduction will work to substantially reduce disaster
                  risk and losses through the prevention of new and the reduction of existing disaster risks. In line
                  with the Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction, the Office will aim at strengthenin g the
                  foundation for the resilience of people, communities, governments and businesses by promoting
                  better understanding of risk and strengthened risk governance. It will advocate for increased
                  investment and better preparedness. In 2022, in accordance wit h its mandate, the Office will support
                  the implementation of the Sendai Framework worldwide through the organization of the seventh
                  session of the Global Platform for Disaster Risk Reduction. The Global Platform, which will be
                  hosted by Indonesia, will assess progress and take stock of achievements, lessons learned and best
                  practices in terms of disaster risk reduction. In line with the call of the Secretary -General for a decade
                  of action to deliver the Sustainable Development Goals, the Office will strive to promote risk-
                  informed development at all levels. Generating further evidence -based and practical guidance for
                  the implementation of disaster risk reduction interventions will reinforce a culture of prevention
                  among relevant stakeholders. The Office will also support the development of standards by experts
                  and technical organizations, advocacy initiatives and the dissemination of disaster risk information,
                  policies and practices, and further develop capacities of all stakeholders on disaster risk reductio n.
                  In doing so, the Office will increasingly cooperate with local governments and cities, in addition to
                  national governments. The Office will continue to support United Nations country teams and resident
                  coordinators in integrating disaster risk reduction and resilience into common country analyses and
                  the United Nations Sustainable Development Cooperation Framework. In addition, the Office will
                  enhance linkages and coherence between disaster risk reduction and key related planning and
                  decision-making processes, including climate change preparedness and humanitarian action.
           27.6   For 2022, the programme’s planned deliverables and activities reflect the known and anticipated
                  challenges related to COVID-19 that are being faced by Member States. Such planned d eliverables
                  and activities include: (a) strengthening analytical capacities to support decision makers with regard
                  to identifying emerging needs caused by the direct and indirect impacts of the pandemic;
                  (b) bolstering remote emergency service support and capacity-building; and (c) scaling up
                  humanitarian pooled funds to provide timely and effective funding for humanitarian activities,
                  including in the context of the continued COVID-19 response. The pandemic has worsened the
                  impacts of ongoing and emerging humanitarian crises in the short term. In the longer term, the
                  pandemic highlights the importance of integrating risk management into policies and decision -
                  making. Deliverables and activities planned to meet these challenges include interventions to
                  enhance the preparedness of Member States, partners and communities with regard to biological
                  hazards by promoting a systemic approach to risk and improving the understanding of the cascading
                  effects of risk. The support provided to Member States on issues relat ed to COVID-19 is expected
                  to contribute to planned results in 2022, as described under subprogramme 3, natural disaster risk
                  reduction, and subprogramme 5, humanitarian emergency information and advocacy.
           27.7   With regard to cooperation with other entities at the global, regional, national and local levels, the Office
                  for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs will continue to work with national and local governments,
                  affected communities, the Inter-Agency Standing Committee and other stakeholders, including regional
                  disaster management and response organizations, other regional and subregional organizations, private
                  sector organizations and first responders, to promote principled and effective humanitarian responses.
           27.8   The United Nations Office for Disaster Risk Reduction will likewise advance further cooperation
                  with global and regional organizations and with national counterparts to promote risk -informed
                  decision-making. Cooperation with academia, the private sector and civil society will support an all-
                  of-society approach to disaster risk reduction. The Office will also stress cooperation at the local
                  level by promoting disaster resilience-building in cities.
           27.9   With regard to inter-agency coordination and liaison, the Office for the Coordination of
                  Humanitarian Affairs will continue, through the Inter-Agency Standing Committee and its subsidiary

21-04597                                                                                                                   5/67
Part VI        Humanitarian assistance

               bodies, to coordinate the development of guidance for the humanitarian system, including on
               operations policy development and advocacy. It will provide and manage global platforms, such as
               the United Nations Disaster Assessment and Coordination Team mechanism and the International
               Search and Rescue Advisory Group, to pool resources and facilitate a coordinated response to
               humanitarian crises. The Office will also collaborate closely with the Development Coordination
               Office and other United Nations agencies. At the country level, the Office for the Coordination of
               Humanitarian Affairs coordinates with and supports United Nations agencies, such as the World
               Food Programme (WFP), the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP), the United Nations
               Children’s Fund, the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, the World Health
               Organization (WHO), the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR)
               and the United Nations Population Fund, throughout the humanitarian programme cycle to ensure
               coherent, effective and consistent system-wide response strategies that meet the humanitarian needs
               of affected people and that minimize the duplication and gaps in response efforts.
       27.10   As Chair of the Senior Leadership Group on Disaster Risk Reduction for Resilience, the United
               Nations Office for Disaster Risk Reduction will continue playing a coordinating role for disaster risk
               reduction within the United Nations system. At the technical level, the Office will also strengthen
               coordination within the United Nations system by convening the United Nations Disaster Risk
               Reduction Focal Points’ Group. Support for United Nations country teams and partnership with
               resident coordinators will promote the development of national and local capacity and the delivery
               of technical expertise in various field environments.
       27.11   With regard to the external factors, the overall plan for 2022 is based on the following planning
               assumptions:
               (a)   The impact of the global economic recession triggered by the COVID -19 pandemic will
                     continue to be felt and will threaten to increase vulnerability, and will be compounded by other
                     disasters;
               (b)   Natural disasters will continue to increase in frequency and magnitude;
               (c)   Humanitarian needs and funding requirements will remain high in 2022.
       27.12   With regard to the COVID-19 pandemic, the programme plan is based on the assumption that the
               proposed deliverables and activities for 2022 will be feasible to implement. However, if the
               pandemic were to further have an impact on the planned deliverables and activities, they would be
               adjusted during 2022 within the scope of the overall objectives, strategies and mandates . Any such
               adjustments would be reported as part of the programme performance information.
       27.13   The Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs integrates a gender perspective in its
               operational activities, deliverables and results, as appropriate. The Office promotes gender equality
               and the empowerment of women and girls, and strives to address protection issues, including gender -
               based violence affecting women and girls, in particular those with disabilities, through its advocacy,
               resource mobilization and programming. Women’s participation and leadership in humanitarian
               decision-making is also a key priority. The Office ensures that a gender perspective is fully integrated
               into its activities through the Office’s policy instruction on gender equ ality and gender action plan,
               in tandem with inter-agency policies and tools, such as the Inter-Agency Standing Committee policy
               on gender equality and the empowerment of women and girls in humanitarian action, its Gender
               Handbook in Humanitarian Action and its Gender Standby Capacity project, and its associated senior
               advisers deployed in support of humanitarian coordinators and humanitarian country teams. It is also
               prioritized in the Office’s communications content.
       27.14   The Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs advances United Nations system -wide
               commitments on protection from sexual exploitation and abuse and sexual harassment. The
               Emergency Relief Coordinator, as Chair of the Inter-Agency Standing Committee, leads and
               promotes Inter-Agency Standing Committee efforts that aim at ensuring a humanitarian environment
               in which people caught up in crises feel safe and respected and can access the protection and
               assistance they need without fear of exploitation or abuse by any aid worker, and i n which aid
               workers themselves feel supported, respected and empowered to deliver such assistance in working

6/67                                                                                                            21-04597
Section 27     Humanitarian assistance

               environments free from sexual harassment. In their coordination role, the field offices of the Office
               for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs support humanitarian coordinators and humanitarian
               country teams in the implementation of inter-agency efforts to prevent exploitation and abuse.
       27.15   The Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs will continue to participate in the
               implementation of the system-wide United Nations Disability Inclusion Strategy and work to achieve
               the commitments made by the Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency
               Relief Coordinator at the 2018 Global Disability Summit in London to make hum anitarian action
               inclusive of persons with disabilities.


               Programme performance in 2020

               Impact of COVID-19 on programme delivery
       27.16   During 2020, the COVID-19 pandemic had an impact on the planned deliverables and activities of
               the programme. This impact included: (a) the cancellation or postponement of conferences, disaster
               risk reduction regional events and training and capacity -building activities due to travel restrictions;
               (b) the delay of some longer-term research and policy work in order to shift capacities to COVID-19
               response support; and (c) the delay of some inter-agency humanitarian evaluations. To mitigate the
               impact, the programme leveraged technical communications platforms and adopted flexible working
               practices to remain fully functional, delivering on its mandates despite the impact of the pandemic
               on operations and people. Conferences, meetings and initiatives to build response capacities were
               held virtually, allowing in some cases for broader and higher-level participation. The cancellation
               and delay of planned deliverables and activities also had an impact on the expected results for 2020,
               as described in the programme performance under subprogrammes 1, 2, 3 and 4.
       27.17   At the same time, however, some planned deliverables and activities were adjusted, and new activities
               were identified during 2020, within the overall scope of the objectives of the subprogrammes, in order
               to support Member States on issues related to the COVID-19 pandemic. These included the
               development of the first-ever Global Humanitarian Response Plan for COVID-19 and subsequent
               updates by the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs together with its partners, which
               provided a comprehensive plan for the COVID-19 response, including analysis, needs and priorities,
               funding requirements and a framework to monitor the response to the pandemic. The Office also
               established and co-led the Global Information Management, Assessment and Analysis Cell on COVID-
               19, together with WHO, UNHCR and the International Organization for Migration. The Cell supports
               the coordination and analysis of the impact of COVID-19 and other shocks, and provides technical
               support and services to prioritized countries and global decision makers upon request. The Office for
               the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs also scaled up humanitarian coordination mechanisms in
               support of governments and resident coordinators in countries not covered by humanitarian response
               plans, and introduced flexible funding modalities for humanitarian pooled funds to enable faster
               channelling of funds to the COVID-19 response. The United Nations Office for Disaster Risk
               Reduction, as part of its effort to support a hazard-aware approach, promoted analysis and the sharing
               of evidence, knowledge and learning on the COVID-19 pandemic for more effective disaster risk
               reduction policy and practice. The modified and new deliverables and activities contributed to results
               in 2020, as described in the programme performance under subprogrammes 2, 3 and 5.
       27.18   Reflecting the importance of continuous improvement and responding to the evolving needs of
               Member States, the programme will mainstream lessons learned and best practices related to the
               adjustments and adaption of its programme owing to the COVID -19 pandemic. Specific examples
               of best practices and its “build back better” approach include improved collaboration among field,
               headquarters and humanitarian partners through the use of virtual working platforms, including,
               where feasible, the conduct of meetings virtually in lieu of travel; a shift to electronic clearance
               processes; and strengthened adaptive management capacities to ensure effective leadership through
               remote means. Strengthening support for managers with regard to improving their remote
               management skills will remain important.



21-04597                                                                                                            7/67
Part VI          Humanitarian assistance

                 Legislative mandates

         27.19   The list below provides all mandates entrusted to the programme.

General Assembly resolutions
46/182; 75/127     Strengthening of the coordination of            69/313        Addis Ababa Action Agenda of the Third
                   humanitarian emergency assistance of the                      International Conference on Financing for
                   United Nations                                                Development (Addis Ababa Action Agenda)
47/120 A and B     An Agenda for Peace: preventive diplomacy       70/1          Transforming our world: the 2030 Agenda
                   and related matters                                           for Sustainable Development
52/12              Renewing the United Nations: a programme        72/305        Review of the implementation of General
                   for reform                                                    Assembly resolution 68/1 on the
52/167             Safety and security of humanitarian personnel                 strengthening of the Economic and Social
                                                                                 Council
60/1               2005 World Summit Outcome
                                                                   74/160        Protection of and assistance to internally
62/208             Triennial comprehensive policy review of                      displaced persons
                   operational activities for development of the
                                                                   74/306        Comprehensive and coordinated response to the
                   United Nations system
                                                                                 coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic
67/226; 75/233     Quadrennial comprehensive policy review of
                                                                   75/124        International cooperation on humanitarian
                   operational activities for development of the
                                                                                 assistance in the field of natural disasters,
                   United Nations system
                                                                                 from relief to development
68/1               Review of the implementation of General
                                                                   75/125        Safety and security of humanitarian personnel
                   Assembly resolution 61/16 on the
                                                                                 and protection of United Nations personnel
                   strengthening of the Economic and Social
                   Council

Economic and Social Council resolution
2019/14            Strengthening of the coordination of
                   emergency humanitarian assistance of the
                   United Nations

Security Council resolutions
1265 (1999)                                                        2531 (2020)
1894 (2009)                                                        2532 (2020)
2222 (2015)                                                        2533 (2020)
2286 (2016)                                                        2534 (2020)
2417 (2018)                                                        2540 (2020)
2474 (2019)                                                        2542 (2020)
2475 (2019)                                                        2543 (2020)
2514 (2020)                                                        2550 (2020)
2520 (2020)                                                        2552 (2020)
2522 (2020)                                                        2556 (2020)
2524 (2020)


                 Deliverables

         27.20   Table 27.1 lists all cross-cutting deliverables, by category and subcategory, for the period 2020 –2022.




8/67                                                                                                                     21-04597
Section 27        Humanitarian assistance

Table 27.1
Cross-cutting deliverables for the period 2020–2022, by category and subcategory

                                                                                          2020     2020       2021      2022
Category and subcategory                                                               planned    actual   planned   planned


A. Facilitation of the intergovernmental process and expert bodies
    Substantive services for meetings (number of three-hour meetings)                       3         3         3         3
    1. Meetings of the Fifth Committee                                                      1         1         1         1
    2. Meetings of the Committee for Programme and Coordination                             1         1         1         1
    3. Meetings of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions         1         1         1         1



                  Evaluation activities

        27.21     The following evaluations completed in 2020 have guided the proposed programme plan for 2022:
                  (a)      Inter-agency humanitarian evaluation on gender equality and the empowerment of women and girls;
                  (b)      Inter-agency humanitarian evaluation of the Ethiopia drought response;
                  (c)      Inter-agency humanitarian evaluation on the response to Cyclone Idai in Mozambique;
                  (d)      Final evaluation of the project entitled “Making Cities Sustainable and Resilient: Implementing
                           the Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction 2015 –2030 at the Local Level”.
        27.22     The findings of the evaluations referenced above have been taken into consideration for the proposed
                  programme plan for 2022. For example, one of the findings of the inter-agency humanitarian evaluation
                  in Mozambique concerned the limited involvement of the private sector. To address this gap, the Office
                  for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs is working to strengthen private sector engagement
                  through the Connecting Business initiative, as described under result 3 of subprogramme 4.
        27.23     Similarly, the final evaluation of the project entitled “Making Cities Sustainable and Resilient:
                  Implementing the Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction 2015 –2030 at the Local Level”
                  highlighted that risk prevention governance at the local level relies on a broad range of stakeho lders,
                  including regulators, associations, civil society, academia and the private sector. In applying the
                  lesson, the United Nations Office for Disaster Risk Reduction is developing a systemic, joined -up
                  approach to risk reduction at the local level, as described under result 3 of subprogramme 3.
        27.24     The following evaluations are planned for 2022:
                  (a)      Review of progress: mainstreaming gender equality and empowerment of women and girls into
                           the humanitarian, development and peace nexus (begun in 2020; to be completed in 2021);
                  (b)      Inter-agency humanitarian evaluation of the Yemen response (begun in 2020; to be completed
                           in 2021/22);
                  (c)      Inter-agency humanitarian evaluation of the COVID-19 response (to begin in 2021; to be
                           completed in 2022).


                  Programme of work
                  Subprogramme 1
                  Policy and analysis

                  Objective

        27.25     The objective, to which this subprogramme contributes, is to improve the strategic and operational
                  coherence of humanitarian response.

21-04597                                                                                                                9/67
Part VI         Humanitarian assistance

                Strategy

        27.26   To contribute to the objective, the subprogramme will identify emerging humanitarian trends to
                support the comprehensive, authoritative and evidence-based assessment of global humanitarian
                needs and analyse challenges and opportunities for humanitarian pol icy and programme development.
        27.27   The subprogramme will also identify policy and programmatic solutions and best practices,
                innovative concepts such as the use of new and emerging technologies in humanitarian action, and
                steps to increase preparedness and organizational readiness, which will be disseminated widely to
                inform and guide policy, operational decisions and crisis management.
        27.28   The above-mentioned work is expected to result in:
                (a)   Improved humanitarian action that addresses evolving challenges to the humanitarian system;
                (b)   A humanitarian system that remains relevant and adapted to the ever-changing humanitarian
                      operational environment.


                Programme performance in 2020

        27.29   Programme performance in 2020 includes the below result that emerged during 2020, as well as
                programme performance presented under results 1 and 2 below.

                Global Humanitarian Policy Forum 2020: policy recommendations linked with analysis of
                trends, research and inclusive consultations with partners
        27.30   The subprogramme convened the annual Global Humanitarian Policy Forum with members of the
                humanitarian community to project future trends, consider policy issues and explore the practical
                challenges and opportunities of technology in humanitarian response coordination. The 2020 Forum
                focused on assessing the longer-term impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic on humanitarian needs
                and humanitarian aid. The Forum included participants across industries and sectors, including
                Member States, humanitarian, development and multilateral organizations, local and international
                non-governmental organizations (NGOs), academic and research institutions, and private sector
                practitioners, policymakers and students to identify common experiences and examp les of
                programmatic and organizational change, and provide suggestions for systemic adjustments to
                further optimize the ways in which the humanitarian system works and collaborates. Given the
                difficulty of holding an in-person Forum as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, the Forum was held
                virtually and was entirely open to the public. As a result, over 1,200 people from more than 80
                countries participated through web-based social media platforms.
        27.31   The subprogramme produced a background brief for the Global Humanitarian Policy Forum that
                summarized the extensive research and analysis published since the start of the pandemic on issues
                such as the global health situation, the socioeconomic crisis, the geopolitical environment, the
                devastating effects of climate change and growing vulnerability, and how they might transform
                humanitarian action. The discussions of the Forum were published in an outcome paper entitled
                “A case for transformation? The long-term implications of the COVID-19 pandemic”.

                Progress towards the attainment of the objective, and performance measure
        27.32   The above-mentioned work contributed to the objective, as demonstrated by recommendations for
                action by the humanitarian system emerging from the Global Humanitarian Policy F orum that reflect
                trends analysis, research and wide consultation within and beyond the humanitarian community by
                convening members of the humanitarian community (see table 27.2).




10/67                                                                                                      21-04597
Section 27           Humanitarian assistance

Table 27.2
Performance measure

2018 (actual)                                    2019 (actual)                              2020 (actual)


–                                                Recommendations emerging from              Recommendations for action
                                                 the Global Humanitarian Policy             emerging from the Global
                                                 Forum that reflect trends analysis,        Humanitarian Policy Forum that
                                                 research and wide consultation             reflect trends analysis, research and
                                                 within and beyond the humanitarian         wide consultation within and
                                                 community: rising nationalism and          beyond the humanitarian
                                                 the retreat from multilateralism;          community: preparing for the
                                                 increased conflicts and the fracture       unknown; investing in local
                                                 of global norms; the rise of political,    solutions; leading with equity;
                                                 social and economic inequality; the        delivering on the digital promise;
                                                 accelerating impacts of climate            and building coalitions for success
                                                 change; new and emerging
                                                 technologies; and the spread of
                                                 infectious diseases


                     Planned results for 2022

        27.33        The planned results for 2022 include results 1 and 2, which are updates of results presented in the
                     preceding proposed programme plans and therefore show both the programme performance in 2020
                     and the proposed programme plan for 2022. Result 3 is a new planned result.

                     Result 1: increased collaboration between humanitarian and development partners at the
                     country level1
                     Programme performance in 2020
        27.34        The subprogramme has supported the implementation of closer humanitarian -development
                     collaboration towards collective outcomes, including through the conduct of joint analysis and
                     joined-up planning across humanitarian and development partners. In 2020, the subprogramme also
                     supported effective linkages between humanitarian and socioeconomic responses to the COVID -19
                     pandemic.
        27.35        The above-mentioned work contributed to the development of common strategies between
                     humanitarian and development partners in 10 countries, which met the planned target reflected in
                     the proposed programme budget for 2020.

                     Proposed programme plan for 2022
        27.36        The subprogramme will continue the work related to the planned result, in line with its mandate. To
                     contribute to further progress towards the objective, the subprogramme will continue to support
                     humanitarian country teams and United Nations country teams in the implementation of the
                     aforementioned common strategies. To account for the additi onal strain that the COVID-19
                     pandemic has put on partners, the subprogramme’s work will build on the progress achieved and
                     continue to increase the complementarity of humanitarian and development work by strengthening
                     complementary programming and funding to achieve common strategies in the same countries rather
                     than aiming at supporting additional countries. The expected progress is presented in the updated
                     performance measure below (see table 27.3).


             __________________
                 1
                     As reflected in proposed programme budget for 2020 ( A/74/6 (Sect. 27)).

21-04597                                                                                                                     11/67
Part VI               Humanitarian assistance

Table 27.3
Performance measure

2018 (actual)                   2019 (actual)            2020 (actual)             2021 (planned) a           2022 (planned)


Humanitarian and                Humanitarian and         Humanitarian and          Humanitarian and           Humanitarian and
development partners            development              development               development                development partners
have defined                    partners have            partners have             partners have              strengthen existing
common strategies in            defined common           defined common            defined common             complementary
6 countries                     strategies in 8          strategies in 10          strategies in 12           programming and
                                countries                countries                 countries                  funding to implement
                                                                                                              common strategies in
                                                                                                              the 12 countries

  a
      To maintain accountability for initial programme plans, the 2021 target is carried forward from the proposed programme
      budget for 2021 and reflects best estimates at that point in time befo re the COVID-19 pandemic. Programme performance for
      2021 will be reported in the proposed programme budget for 2023.

                      Result 2: how technology may shape the humanitarian operating environment 2
                      Programme performance in 2020
         27.37        The subprogramme conducted research on the opportunities and challenges of using technology to
                      make humanitarian work more effective and efficient. In April 2021, the Office for the Coordination
                      of Humanitarian Affairs published its report, entitled “From digital promise to frontline practice: new
                      and emerging technologies in humanitarian action”, which featured 35 case studies and examples that
                      illustrate the challenges and opportunities of using new technologies in humanitarian contexts, with
                      a focus on the areas that had the most potential for making humanitarian efforts more effective and
                      efficient in the coming years. These include mobile applications, chatbots and social media; digital
                      cash transfers; crisis maps and dashboards; biometrics and digital iden tity technologies; uncrewed
                      aircraft; blockchain technology; 3-D printing; artificial intelligence; predictive analytics; and the
                      Internet of Things, as well as working with data and digital technology more generally.
          27.38       The subprogramme also used the platform of the Global Humanitarian Policy Forum to discuss lessons
                      learned from the use of technologies in the response to the COVID-19 pandemic to improve
                      humanitarian effectiveness. For example, the COVID-19 response showcased both the potential and the
                      risks of new and emerging technologies while simultaneously accelerating their adoption and use.
                      Artificial intelligence facilitated the mapping of disease outbreaks, diagnoses and the development of
                      treatments and vaccines. Biometrics, blockchain technology and digital cash enabled contactless access
                      to aid. Uncrewed aircraft delivered medical supplies and testing samples. Chatbots provided vital
                      information and telehealth support. At the same time, concern mounted over data protection, privacy
                      and security, personal liberty and misinformation. The massive shift to virtual environments, remote
                      education, videoconferencing and e-commerce also raised fundamental questions about technological
                      preparedness and effectiveness, and the challenges of digital inequ ality. The outcomes of these
                      discussions will be integrated into the ongoing research regarding the opportunities and challenges
                      posed by technology in terms of improving the effectiveness and efficiency of humanitarian assistance.
         27.39        The above-mentioned work contributed to increased awareness on how technology can be used to
                      improve the effectiveness of humanitarian assistance, which did not meet the planned target of
                      testing initiatives for technology and innovation in selected humanitari an response contexts reflected
                      in the proposed programme budget for 2021, owing to a refocusing of priorities towards the
                      COVID-19 response during 2020.




            __________________
                  2
                      As reflected in the proposed programme budget for 2021 ( A/75/6 (Sect. 27) and A/75/6 (Sect. 27)/Corr.1).

12/67                                                                                                                             21-04597
Section 27        Humanitarian assistance

                  Proposed programme plan for 2022
         27.40    The subprogramme will continue the work related to the planned result, in line with its mandate. To
                  contribute to further progress towards the objective and in response to recent developments, the
                  subprogramme’s work will evolve to include the sustainable and systematic use of technologies by
                  humanitarians and their partners. The subprogramme will also explore options of developing further
                  policy guidance for the humanitarian community based on the evolving policy issues from the
                  Secretary-General’s Road Map for Digital Cooperation. The expected progress is pre sented in the
                  updated performance measure below (see table 27.4).

Table 27.4
Performance measure

2018 (actual)                2019 (actual)            2020 (actual)             2021 (planned) a        2022 (planned)


Stakeholders share           United Nations           Increased                 Increased use of        Sustainable and
best practices on            Secretariat-wide         awareness on how          strategic               systematic use of
technology and               initiatives on           technology can be         technologies by         technologies by
innovation to improve        technology and           used to improve the       humanitarian            humanitarians and
efficiency and the           innovation               effectiveness of          actors                  their partners to
effectiveness of                                      humanitarian                                      facilitate humanitarian
humanitarian response                                 assistance                                        response

  a
      To maintain accountability for initial programme plans, the 2021 target is carried forward from the proposed programme
      budget for 2021 and reflects best estimates at that point in time before the COVID -19 pandemic. Programme performance for
      2021 will be reported in the proposed programme budget for 2023.

                  Result 3: consolidated analysis for more focused evidence-based policy discussions and analysis
                  Proposed programme plan for 2022
         27.41    A thorough analysis of the humanitarian context is crucial to enable a well -informed assessment of
                  humanitarian needs and ensure the strategic and operational coherence of humanitarian response.
                  The subprogramme researched annual policy trends and challenges for humanitarian efforts to
                  inform future policies and incorporate into the annual Global Humani tarian Overview, the most
                  comprehensive, authoritative and evidence-based assessment of humanitarian needs.

                  Lessons learned and planned change
         27.42    The lesson for the subprogramme was that every year there are numerous policy papers put out by a
                  growing humanitarian community as a result of increased partnerships between humanitarian
                  organizations and a diverse range of sectors. Consolidated research on key trends and the challenges
                  and implications of humanitarian action provided ahead of time for fu rther analysis, consultation,
                  and discussion at the Global Humanitarian Policy Forum would facilitate the recommendation of
                  policy priorities. In applying this lesson, the subprogramme will align the trends presented in the
                  Global Humanitarian Overview with the policy priorities identified at the Global Humanitarian
                  Policy Forum. This would ensure that the Global Humanitarian Overview is forward -looking and
                  mirrors the most up-to-date thinking in the humanitarian community.

                  Expected progress towards the attainment of the objective, and performance measure
         27.43    This work is expected to contribute to the objective, as demonstrated by an increased uptake of
                  Global Humanitarian Policy Forum research findings and recommendations in the policy agenda for
                  the humanitarian community (see table 27.5).




21-04597                                                                                                                     13/67
Part VI          Humanitarian assistance

Table 27.5
Performance measure

2018 (actual)               2019 (actual)                2020 (actual)            2021 (planned)           2022 (planned)


Summary of                  Annual world                 Thematic                 Trends in the Global     Increased uptake of
countries’                  humanitarian data            alignment of the         Humanitarian             Global Humanitarian
humanitarian                and trends                   Global                   Overview supported       Policy Forum
response plans in the       incorporated into            Humanitarian             by policy priorities     research findings and
Global Humanitarian         the Global                   Overview with the        identified at the        recommendations in
Overview                    Humanitarian                 Global                   Global                   the policy agenda for
                            Overview                     Humanitarian             Humanitarian Policy      the humanitarian
                                                         Policy Forum             Forum                    community


                 Legislative mandates

         27.44   The list below provides all mandates entrusted to the subprogramme.

General Assembly resolutions
56/89             Scope of legal protection under the                    73/138        White Helmets Commission: participation of
                  Convention on the Safety of United Nations                           volunteers in the activities of the United
                  and Associated Personnel                                             Nations in the field of humanitarian relief,
61/117            Applicability of the Geneva Convention                               rehabilitation and technical cooperation for
                  relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons in                    development
                  Time of War, of 12 August 1949, to the                 73/195        Global Compact for Safe, Orderly and
                  Occupied Palestinian Territory, including East                       Regular Migration
                  Jerusalem, and other occupied Arab territories         75/163        Office of the United Nations High
62/134            Eliminating rape and other forms of sexual                           Commissioner for Refugees
                  violence in all their manifestations, including        75/164        Assistance to refugees, returnees and
                  in conflict and related situations                                   displaced persons in Africa
63/147            New international humanitarian order


                 Deliverables

         27.45   Table 27.6 lists all deliverables, by category and subcategory, for the period 2020 –2022 that
                 contributed and are expected to contribute to the attainment of the objective stated above.




14/67                                                                                                                          21-04597
Section 27        Humanitarian assistance

Table 27.6
Subprogramme 1: deliverables for the period 2020–2022, by category and subcategory

                                                                                                  2020    2020       2021      2022
Category and subcategory                                                                       planned   actual   planned   planned


A. Facilitation of the intergovernmental process and expert bodies
    Parliamentary documentation (number of documents)                                               3        3         3         3
    1. Report of the Secretary-General on the strengthening of the coordination of
       emergency humanitarian assistance of the United Nations                                      1        1         1         1
    2. Report of the Secretary-General on the protection of civilians                               1        1         1         1
    3. Report of the Secretary-General on natural disasters                                         1        1         1         1
    Substantive services for meetings (number of three-hour meetings)                               6        6         6         6
    4. Meetings of the Third Committee                                                              1        1         1         1
    5. Meetings of the Expert Group on the Protection of Civilians                                  4        4         4         4
    6. Meetings of the Economic and Social Council humanitarian affairs segment                     1        1         1         1
B. Generation and transfer of knowledge
    Seminars, workshops and training events (number of days)                                        3        3         3         3
    7. Organization of forums/workshops with academic institutions and non-governmental
       organizations to promote humanitarian assistance and to address humanitarian concerns        3        3         3         3
    Technical materials (number of materials)                                                       2        2         2         2
    8. Strategy papers, policy tools and guidance notes for humanitarian agencies on the
       relation among the political, humanitarian assistance and human rights dimensions of
       the United Nations response to crises                                                        1        1         1         1
    9. Studies, guidance and policy analysis on developments in the humanitarian sector             1        1         1         1



                  Subprogramme 2
                  Coordination of humanitarian action and emergency response

                  Objective

        27.46     The objective, to which this subprogramme contributes, is to ensure a coherent, effective and timely
                  humanitarian response to alleviate human suffering in natural disasters and complex emergencies.


                  Strategy

        27.47     To contribute to the objective, the subprogramme will maintain an effective coordination system to
                  convene humanitarian actors and support senior humanitarian leadership at the g lobal level and in
                  countries affected by natural disasters and complex emergencies. As part of this effort, the
                  subprogramme will coordinate timely and objective multisectoral assessments and analysis of
                  humanitarian needs, and support response planning and programming to provide life-saving
                  assistance to people in need during and in the aftermath of emergencies. The subprogramme will also
                  promote principled humanitarian assistance and coordinate resource mobilization efforts in support
                  of such action worldwide. Efforts will be made to reduce funding gaps that hamper humanitarian
                  operations, including through effective partnerships with humanitarian actors, Member States and
                  civil society, and through the effective management and disbursement of funding from humanitarian
                  pooled funds. Furthermore, the subprogramme will seek to strengthen linkages between humanitarian
                  assistance and efforts to support resilience, early recovery and development to reduce the needs and
                  vulnerabilities of affected people. Every effort will be made to collect data disaggregated by sex and
                  age, and to ensure that gender, age and disability are taken into account in all aspects of the response.


21-04597                                                                                                                     15/67
Part VI         Humanitarian assistance

        27.48   The above-mentioned work is expected to result in:
                (a)   Improved decision-making by humanitarian actors on priority humanitarian needs based on a
                      timely analysis;
                (b)   Reduced duplication of response interventions through strengthened coordinated human itarian
                      response planning;
                (c)   Increased and timely humanitarian funding for the international humanitarian system to
                      respond to natural disasters and complex emergencies.


                Programme performance in 2020

        27.49   Programme performance in 2020 includes the below result that emerged during 2020, as well as
                programme performance presented under results 1 and 2 below.
                Global Humanitarian Response Plan for COVID-19
        27.50   In response to the COVID-19 outbreak, the United Nations launched the Global Humanitarian
                Response Plan to address the immediate humanitarian consequences of the pandemic. The Response
                Plan is a joint effort by members of the Inter-Agency Standing Committee, including United Nations
                agencies, other international organizations and NGOs with a humanitarian mandate. It was the first-
                ever global humanitarian plan to respond to a global pandemic, and was updated quickly to keep
                pace with the evolution of the pandemic. The subprogramme ensured essential coordination of the
                Plan’s updates through dialogue with Inter-Agency Standing Committee members at Headquarters
                and, in the countries in which it operates, through the facilitation of intersectoral analysis,
                discussions between clusters for planning and reporting against the global monitor ing framework.
                The subprogramme also supported resident coordinators/humanitarian coordinators and worked
                closely with host governments to prepare response plans to address the consequences of the
                pandemic and ensure continuity of humanitarian assistance provisions to those people most in need.
                The subprogramme also embedded staff in a new coordination team and supply chain cell established
                with WHO and WFP to support coordination and information management, and to address logistical
                and supply chain issues in the humanitarian response system. Furthermore, the subprogramme,
                through the Emergency Relief Coordinator, convened principals from humanitarian agencies and
                humanitarian NGOs to agree on coordinated humanitarian response measures.

                Progress towards the attainment of the objective, and performance measure
        27.51   The above-mentioned work contributed to the objective, as demonstrated by the coordinated
                response of partner agencies and humanitarian organizations, which addressed the immediate
                humanitarian consequences of the pandemic and provided life-saving assistance in 63 Global
                Humanitarian Response Plan countries (see table 27.7).

Table 27.7
Performance measure

2018 (actual)                             2019 (actual)                       2020 (actual)


–                                         –                                   Coordinated response of partner
                                                                              agencies and humanitarian
                                                                              organizations, which addressed the
                                                                              immediate humanitarian
                                                                              consequences of the pandemic and
                                                                              provided life-saving assistance in
                                                                              63 Global Humanitarian Response
                                                                              Plan countries



16/67                                                                                                       21-04597
Section 27           Humanitarian assistance

                     Planned results for 2022
         27.52       The planned results for 2022 include results 1 and 2, which are updates of results presented in the
                     preceding proposed programme plans and therefore show both the programme performance in 2020
                     and the proposed programme plan for 2022. Result 3 is a new planned result.

                     Result 1: increased use of humanitarian funding for early action 3
                     Programme performance in 2020
         27.53       The subprogramme continued its work related to early response mechanisms and enhanced planning,
                     in line with its mandate. The subprogramme developed contingency funding mechanisms for
                     increased emergency response funding for humanitarian partners, which enabled timely response at
                     the early stages of an emergency based on forecasts and risk assessments. Since 2018, the
                     subprogramme has worked with donors, other funds, implementing organizations, governments and
                     experts to promote change towards a more anticipatory approach in the humanitarian system. This
                     includes actions by the Central Emergency Response Fund to scale up collective antici patory action
                     for different shocks and across different regions.
         27.54       The above-mentioned work contributed to the formalization of the Central Emergency Response
                     Fund early action approach, with frameworks for food insecurity in Somalia ($15 million), fo r floods
                     in Bangladesh ($2.8 million) and for drought in Ethiopia ($13.2 million), which met the planned
                     target reflected in the proposed programme budget for 2020.

                     Proposed programme plan for 2022
         27.55       The subprogramme will continue the work related to the planned result, in line with its mandate. To
                     contribute to further progress towards the objective, the subprogramme will build on achievements
                     in proving the effectiveness of anticipating the impact of humanitarian shocks such as drought, floods
                     and pest infestations, and will continue to scale up early action by developing two other early action
                     frameworks. The expected progress is presented in the performance measure below (see table 27.8).

Table 27.8
Performance measure

2018 (actual)                  2019 (actual)             2020 (actual)              2021 (planned) a      2022 (planned)


Central Emergency              Expansion of the          Central Emergency          Central Emergency     Two countries adopt
Response Fund early            pilot projects and        Response Fund early        Response fund         early action
action approach is             development of a          action approach is         early action review   frameworks
piloted                        methodology for a         formalized with            and lessons learned
                               Central Emergency         frameworks for food        and utilization of
                               Response Fund             security in Somalia        other financial
                               early action              ($15 million), for         instruments for
                               approach                  floods in Bangladesh       early action
                                                         ($2.8 million) and for
                                                         drought in Ethiopia
                                                         ($13.2 million)

  a
      To maintain accountability for initial programme plans, the 2021 target is carried forward from the proposed programme
      budget for 2021 and reflects best estimates at that point in time before the COVID -19 pandemic. Programme performance for
      2021 will be reported in the proposed programme budget for 2023.




             __________________
                 3
                     As reflected in the proposed programme budget for 2020 ( A/74/6 (Sect. 27)).

21-04597                                                                                                                     17/67
Part VI             Humanitarian assistance

                    Result 2: an enhanced Global Humanitarian Overview 4
                    Programme performance in 2020
        27.56       The Global Humanitarian Overview provides a comprehensive and evidence -based assessment of
                    global humanitarian needs. It presents an overview of global trends, costed plans for the coordinated
                    response to crises by humanitarian organizations and a snapshot of the tools and processes that are
                    helping humanitarians deliver aid more effectively. The Overview is the consolidated inter -agency
                    funding appeal published by the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs with
                    contributions from across the United Nations, NGOs and other organizations. By providing a detailed
                    assessment of humanitarian needs and how best to meet them, the Overview supports advocacy and
                    system-wide resource mobilization efforts.
        27.57       The subprogramme continued its work on the 2020 Global Humanitarian Overview consolidated
                    appeal and issued monthly updates throughout the year that focused on resource mobilization and
                    the analysis of evolving humanitarian needs. The subprogramme also released the 2021 Global
                    Humanitarian Overview in December 2020. Seeking to improve its coverage of global trends and
                    their impact on humanitarian action, the 2021 Global Humanitarian Overview included a broader
                    overview and analysis of vulnerable groups such as older persons, persons with disabiliti es and
                    young people. The 2021 Overview also sought to enhance gender analysis throughout the report,
                    both by mainstreaming gender analysis and by having dedicated sections on gender equality, the
                    prevention of gender-based violence and protection from sexual exploitation and abuse. In addition
                    to this improved global dimension, the 2021 Overview benefited from the introduction of
                    intersectoral needs analysis to inform country-based programming. Finally, the migration of the
                    Global Humanitarian Overview from a printed/PDF-only publication to a full online publication
                    drastically increased the reach of the publication. It allowed for the inclusion of more topics and
                    improved the presentation of material through the use of multimedia and charts. It also improve d the
                    publication’s accessibility, as it used a responsive platform that included provisions for visitors with
                    impairments. Within one month of its launch, the platform received more than 10 times the number
                    of visitors compared with the total number of Global Humanitarian Overview downloads in 2020
                    (over 10,000 visitors compared with 1,000 downloads). At the same time, the subprogramme had to
                    contend with the unforeseen COVID-19 outbreak, the resulting increase in humanitarian needs and
                    funding requirements and a global economic recession.
        27.58       The above-mentioned work contributed to 13 per cent of humanitarian response plans receiving
                    75 per cent of funding requirements in 2020, which did not meet the target of 45 per cent of
                    humanitarian response plans that were 75 per cent funded reflected in the proposed programme
                    budget for 2021. The 2020 Global Humanitarian Overview raised more than $17 billion for United
                    Nations humanitarian appeals to reach nearly 100 million people with life -saving support, which is
                    an increase compared with 2019. However, the requirements for the 2020 Global Humanitarian
                    Overview increased significantly over the course of 2020 by more than $10 billion. In the context of
                    a global pandemic, and despite the continued generosity of donors, the gap between needs and
                    available funds has continued to grow.

                    Proposed programme plan for 2022
        27.59       The subprogramme will continue the work related to the planned result, in line with its mandate. To
                    contribute to further progress towards the objective, the subprogramme will continue to coordinate
                    funding requirements for inter-agency appeals, providing the most authoritative evidence base of
                    humanitarian needs and creating a vehicle for advocating for the most vulnerable. While
                    humanitarian funding continues to rise, the growth of the largest plans, along with numerous plans
                    with requirements of more than $1 billion (13 in 2021; 7 in 2020), has made it difficult to meet the
                    funding target and reduce the gap in coverage between the best-funded and the least-funded appeals.
                    The expected progress is presented in the performance measure below (see figure 27.I).

          __________________
                4
                    As reflected in the proposed programme budget for 2021 ( A/75/6 (Sect. 27) and A/75/6 (Sect. 27)/Corr.1).

18/67                                                                                                                           21-04597
Section 27         Humanitarian assistance

Figure 27.I
Performance measure: share of humanitarian response plans that are 75 per cent funded
(Percentage)



60
                                                                                     50a                     50
50

40
                                        30
30
                  18
20
                                                               13
10

 0
                2018                  2019                   2020                   2021                   2022
               (actual)              (actual)               (actual)              (planned)              (planned)
  a
      To maintain accountability for initial programme plans, the 2021 target is carried forward from the proposed programme
      budget for 2021 and reflects best estimates at that point in time before the COVID -19 pandemic. Programme performance for
      2021 will be reported in the proposed programme budget for 2023.

                   Result 3: strengthened humanitarian response planning
                   Proposed programme plan for 2022
         27.60     The humanitarian programme cycle consists of several stages, from coordinated needs assessments,
                   analysis and planning to operations, and ensures the monitoring of the situation by humanitarian actors
                   and continued dialogue with host governments and other stakeholders. The tools used at the country
                   level to enable this strategic coordination and dialogue in support of Member States are the humanitarian
                   needs overview, a document presenting a joint analysis of humanitarian needs, and the humanitarian
                   response plan, which crystallizes decisions on targeting, the priority actions required and the financial
                   requirements needed to ensure a people-centred, effective, principled and needs-based response to a
                   crisis. The subprogramme has continued its work in support of needs assessments and analysis by
                   humanitarian actors through the humanitarian programme cycle, in line with its mandate.

                   Lessons learned and planned change
         27.61     The lesson for the subprogramme was that a more targeted and efficient humanitarian response
                   requires humanitarian actors to look beyond the sectoral analysis of needs towards a more people-
                   centred, holistic approach that identifies the most vulnerable populations and the combination and
                   severity of the needs they face. In applying this lesson, the subprogramme will further develop a
                   framework (the Joint Intersectoral Analysis Framework) to better articulate the interlinkages and
                   compounding effects across different sectors. In 2021, an independent review will be undertaken by
                   an academic research institute to validate the methodology of the Framework and inform
                   recommendations to further strengthen the approach. The Framework serves as a pivotal opportunity
                   to ensure that local actors are contributing to an overall picture of the severity of needs, the
                   relationships between needs and the way the humanitarian community should prioritize and focus
                   its response. During the period 2021–2022, this aspect of the Framework will be further elaborated
                   and expanded, including by monitoring the level of engagement with local actors.

                   Expected progress towards the attainment of the objective, and performance measure
         27.62     This work is expected to contribute to the objective, as demonstrated by more humanitarian response
                   plans reflecting priorities based on intersectoral needs analysis. The expected progress is presented
                   in the performance measure below (see table 27.9).



21-04597                                                                                                                     19/67
Part VI           Humanitarian assistance

Table 27.9
Performance measure

2018 (actual)                 2019 (actual)              2020 (actual)            2021 (planned)             2022 (planned)


Office for the                Provisional                Framework                Application of new         More humanitarian
Coordination of               conceptual elements        endorsed by the          Framework for              response plans
Humanitarian Affairs          of a joint                 Inter-Agency             selected                   reflect priorities
and humanitarian              intersectoral              Standing                 humanitarian needs         based on
partners involved in          analysis framework         Committee                overviews and              intersectoral needs
the development of a                                                              humanitarian               analysis
joint intersectoral                                                               response plans
analysis framework


                  Legislative mandates

         27.63    The list below provides all mandates entrusted to the subprogramme.

General Assembly resolutions
63/147               New international humanitarian order                75/90          The situation in Afghanistan
68/129               Assistance to survivors of the 1994 genocide        75/126         Assistance to the Palestinian people
                     in Rwanda, particularly orphans, widows             75/164         Assistance to refugees, returnees and
                     and victims of sexual violence                                     displaced persons in Africa
74/114               Persistent legacy of the Chernobyl disaster

Security Council presidential statement
S/PRST/2015/23


                  Deliverables

         27.64    Table 27.10 lists all deliverables, by category and subcategory, for the period 2020–2022 that
                  contributed and are expected to contribute to the attainment of the objective stated above.

Table 27.10
Subprogramme 2: deliverables for the period 2020–2022, by category and subcategory

                                                                                                      2020    2020        2021       2022
Category and subcategory                                                                           planned   actual    planned    planned


A. Facilitation of the intergovernmental process and expert bodies
    Parliamentary documentation (number of documents)                                                   4        4            4         4
    1. Report to the General Assembly on the Central Emergency Response Fund                            1        1            1         1
    2. High-level pledging events on the provision of international assistance to countries
       affected by humanitarian emergencies                                                             3        3            3         3
    Substantive services for meetings (number of three-hour meetings)                                   2        2            2         2
    3. High-level meetings and side events of the General Assembly on the provision of
       international assistance to countries affected by humanitarian emergencies                       2        2            2         2
B. Seminars, workshops and training events (number of days)                                             2        2            2         2
    4. Workshops on humanitarian law and other emerging issues for resident
       coordinators/humanitarian coordinators                                                           2        2            2         2



20/67                                                                                                                             21-04597
Section 27        Humanitarian assistance


                                                                                                       2020      2020       2021      2022
Category and subcategory                                                                            planned     actual   planned   planned


C. Substantive deliverables
    Humanitarian assistance missions: strategy-building missions to review humanitarian needs and design appropriate response strategies.
    Consultation, advice and advocacy: briefings to the Security Council on specific complex emergency situations; meetings with
    donors, informal briefings and consultations with more than 50 Member States on specific emergency situations and the financi ng
    of humanitarian requirements; consolidated inter-agency appeals for 27 countries and regions affected by humanitarian
    emergencies; meetings with humanitarian organizations in more than 30 countries on operations, policies and coordination
    arrangements; and meetings with Member States, regional organizations and the private sector on common humanitarian actions.
    Databases and substantive digital materials: access to monitoring mechanisms in support of operational partners.
D. Communication deliverables
    Outreach programmes, special events and information materials: meetings and special events on specific complex
    emergency situations; quarterly donor briefings on humanitarian financing; the Central Emergency Response Fund annual
    report; consolidated annual report on country-based pooled funds; and Global Humanitarian Overview.
E. Enabling deliverables
    Administration: delivering of grants from the Central Emergency Response Fund for new and protracted emergencies and of
    grants from the country-based pool funds.



                  Subprogramme 3
                  Natural disaster risk reduction

                  Objective

        27.65     The objective, to which this subprogramme contributes, is to substantially reduce disaster risk and
                  losses in lives, livelihoods and health and in the economic, physical, social, cultural and
                  environmental assets of persons, businesses, communities and cou ntries.


                  Strategy

        27.66     To contribute to the objective, the subprogramme will provide guidance to countries and stakeholders
                  in the implementation of the Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction 2015 –2030. The
                  realignment of the United Nations Office for Disaster Risk Reduction strategic framework will
                  inform priorities and operations. The subprogramme will focus on accelerating the implementation
                  of disaster risk reduction actions through the production and dissemination of knowledge resources
                  and best practices, the provision of technical assistance at the regional, national and local levels,
                  advocacy and capacity development. The subprogramme will mobilize Member States and
                  stakeholders through advocacy and knowledge-sharing to make disaster risk reduction central to
                  sustainable development. The subprogramme will work with practitioners, experts and innovators
                  around the world to generate risk knowledge and analysis on risk trends, patterns, progress and
                  challenges, including through the production of a special Global Assessment Report on Disaster Risk
                  Reduction, to develop innovative approaches and adopt new solutions and working practices to
                  assess and model risk. The operationalization of the Global Risk Assessment Framework will support
                  Member States and stakeholders in the systematic integration of disaster risk reduction into relevant
                  national- and local-level planning processes.
        27.67     The subprogramme will provide targeted support to Member States for the financing of disaster risk
                  reduction actions and in aligning climate change and disaster risk reduction policies and actions,
                  including through the roll-out of guidelines on how to integrate disaster risk reduction with climate
                  change and sustainable development at the regional, national and local levels. The subprogramme will
                  prepare the mid-term review of the Sendai Framework to be conducted in 2023, which will take stock
                  of progress made and identify focus areas to accelerate the implementation of the Sendai Framework.
                  The subprogramme will also cooperate with all partners to enhance synergies, coordination and
                  coherence between the Sendai Framework and other global frameworks adopted by Member States for

21-04597                                                                                                                             21/67
Part VI             Humanitarian assistance

                    the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development. The subprogramme will advocate for the integration
                    of disaster risk reduction into humanitarian contexts and provide guidance to strengthen humanitarian -
                    development collaboration. The subprogramme will continue to review progress achieved in the
                    implementation of the Sendai Framework by conducting a thorough review and stock-taking analysis,
                    including through the organization of the Global Platform for Disaster Risk Reduction. The
                    subprogramme will also continue to provide technical support to enable Member States to report on
                    the global targets of the Sendai Framework and on the 11 indicators of Sustainable Development
                    Goals 1, 11 and 13 using the Framework monitoring system. Throughout all its work streams, the
                    subprogramme will promote inclusion by engaging with a wide range of stakeholders a nd facilitating
                    their participation in the relevant processes at all levels, through the promotion of accessibility and
                    gender parity, as well as by using online platforms to widen the reach of knowledge products.
        27.68       The above-mentioned work is expected to result in:
                    (a)   Improved management of current and future risks through an enhanced understanding of
                          disaster risk reduction by decision makers;
                    (b)   Increased accountability for and commitment to implementing the Sendai Framework for
                          Disaster Risk Reduction;
                    (c)   More effective disaster risk reduction planning and decision -making at the regional, national
                          and local levels that align with the 2030 Agenda;
                    (d)   Multisector and inclusive disaster risk reduction interventions that address the needs of the
                          most vulnerable, thereby contributing to leaving no one behind.


                    Programme performance in 2020

        27.69       Programme performance in 2020 includes the below result that emerged during 2020, as well as
                    programme performance presented under results 1 and 2 below.

                    Cities are better prepared to reduce risks and improve resilience
        27.70       As 68 per cent of the world’s population is expected to live in urban areas by 2050, 5 cities are at the
                    forefront of building resilience for humanity. From this perspective, mayors and local governments are
                    both key targets and key drivers in building urban resilience. Local governments not only benefit from
                    urban risk reduction – they also hold key positions with regard to successfully integrating disaster
                    resilience into urban development planning processes and daily city operations. They are also the
                    closest institutional level to citizens and communities. Against this background, the subprogramme set
                    out to build risk reduction and resilience in cities from all regions by increasing investments in projects
                    where risks have already been assessed and promoting a deeper understanding of risks.
        27.71       The subprogramme initially increased awareness and commitment to city resilience as part of the
                    multi-year Making Cities Resilient campaign implemented jointly with the United Nations Human
                    Settlements Programme (UN-Habitat). The subprogramme also enhanced multisectoral
                    understanding of the opportunities for and the scope of disaster resilience for city government
                    officials through the application of preliminary self-assessments, which guided them to both initial
                    and aspirational next steps. The subprogramme also supported cities in investing additional resources
                    to successfully involve civil society, academia and the private sector in a m ore comprehensive
                    assessment and shared action plan for disaster resilience. Furthermore, the subprogramme mobilized
                    key partners to successfully launch the Making Cities Resilient 2030 initiative, the successor
                    arrangement to the Making Cities Resilient campaign that ended in 2020.




          __________________
                5
                    World Urbanization Prospects: The 2018 Revision (United Nations publication, 2019).

22/67                                                                                                                   21-04597
Section 27      Humanitarian assistance

                Progress towards the attainment of the objective, and performance measure
        27.72   The above-mentioned work contributed to the objective, as demonstrated by 4,360 cities committed
                to disaster risk reduction and the need to implement the Sendai Framework (see figure 27.II). This
                commitment is determined by cities signing up for the Making Cities Resilient campaign. As part of
                the sign-up procedure, cities endorsed the checklist of 10 essentials for making cities resilient.

Figure 27.II
Performance measure: total number of cities committed to disaster risk reduction and the need to
implement the Sendai Framework (cumulative)


4 400
                                                                                            4 360
4 350
                                                          4 311
4 300


4 250
                       4 224

4 200
                       2018                               2019                              2020
                      (actual)                           (actual)                          (actual)

                Impact of COVID-19 on subprogramme delivery
        27.73   Owing to the impact of COVID-19 during 2020, the subprogramme, in close coordination with host
                countries, postponed several events reliant on physical meetings, such as the Regional Platform for
                Disaster Risk Reduction in the Americas and the Caribbean and the Asia -Pacific Ministerial
                Conference on Disaster Risk Reduction. Both are scheduled for 2021, as are the equivalent regional
                platforms for Africa, the Arab States and Europe and Central Asia. Generally, the subprogramme
                adjusted its delivery mechanisms in all areas to ensure maximum effectiveness. Through the
                development of appropriate technical and human capacities and the prompt revision of the format
                and content of the sessions, the United Nations Office for Disaster Risk Reduction managed to
                deliver most of the planned events through virtual meetings. The use of information and
                communications technologies enabling remote delivery increased the number of capacity
                development training sessions and workshops delivered at the regional, national and local levels.
                Statistics show that attendance at the virtual events between March and October 2020 was very high
                and included a large cross-section of stakeholders from more than 190 countries. This method of
                work alone will not be sustainable over the long term, as it does not create the con ditions for rich
                interactions and partnership development. Limited Internet accessibility in some regions presented
                additional challenges for the delivery of the subprogramme through solely digital channels.
                However, the use of digital tools ensured that most expected deliverables were successfully
                implemented despite the constraints created by the pandemic.
        27.74   At the same time, the subprogramme focused on enhancing preventative action by Member States,
                partners and communities with regard to biological hazards and the COVID-19 pandemic by
                addressing risk using a systemic approach. As part of its effort to support an approach that took into
                account multiple hazards, the subprogramme promoted analysis and the sharing of evidence,
                knowledge and lessons learned on the COVID-19 pandemic for more effective disaster risk reduction
                policy and practice, including through policy briefs, additional online capacity development
                initiatives and webinars. The United Nations Office for Disaster Risk Reduction published a report
                entitled “COVID-19 engagement strategy: interim report” in October 2020. The report, which was
                shared and discussed with stakeholders through a coordinated communications campaign,
                highlighted lessons learned, advances made and recommendations.

21-04597                                                                                                         23/67
Part VI             Humanitarian assistance

                    Planned results for 2022

        27.75       The planned results for 2022 include results 1 and 2, which are updates of results presented in the
                    preceding proposed programme plans and therefore show both the programme performance in 2020
                    and the proposed programme plan for 2022. Result 3 is a new planned result.

                    Result 1: disaster risk reduction strategies created through coherence, inclusiveness
                    and partnerships 6
                    Programme performance in 2020
        27.76       The subprogramme has been providing support to Member States in developing and updating
                    national disaster risk reduction strategies to prevent the creation of new risks and reduce existing
                    risks. The subprogramme had to adjust its planned activities to pro vide support with regard to the
                    outbreak of COVID-19. Instead of hands-on capacity development activities, the subprogramme
                    relied on national-level technical assistance and virtual webinars and training to ensure national
                    counterparts had enhanced capacities for risk-informed plans. The subprogramme also provided
                    countries with risk analysis and data. Furthermore, the subprogramme implemented initiatives at the
                    global, regional, national and local levels aimed at strengthening the capacities of national of ficials
                    in disaster loss data collection, analysis and reporting. This included reporting through the official
                    Member State reporting mechanism, namely, the online Sendai Framework monitor.
        27.77       The above-mentioned work contributed to 101 Member and observer States reporting the existence
                    of national disaster risk reduction strategies in line with the Sendai Framework using the Sendai
                    Framework monitor, which did not meet the planned target of 120 countries that developed and/or
                    improved national and local disaster risk reduction strategies reflected in the proposed programme
                    budget for 2020. The current statistical methodology requires national governments to formally
                    report the existence of a national disaster risk reduction strategy using the Sendai Fr amework
                    monitor. This measurement focuses on data officially reported through the mandated
                    intergovernmental instrument, which ensures data consistency, and therefore does not include any
                    national strategy effectively developed but not formally reported.

                    Proposed programme plan for 2022
        27.78       The subprogramme will continue the work related to the planned result, in line with its mandate. To
                    contribute to further progress towards the objective and in response to recent developments, the
                    subprogramme’s work will evolve to include technical support based on evidence-based risk analysis
                    and will build the capacities of Member States in critical areas. The subprogramme will also work
                    to ensure that countries that have developed strategies report them, in ac cordance with the defined
                    process, through the Sendai Framework monitor. The expected progress is presented in the updated
                    performance measure below, which reflects the methodological switch to strategies that are formally
                    reported using the Sendai Framework monitor (see figure 27.III).




          __________________
                6
                    As reflected in the proposed programme budget for 2020 ( A/74/6 (Sect. 27)).

24/67                                                                                                                21-04597
Section 27            Humanitarian assistance

Figure 27.III
Performance measure: total number of countries that develop/improve national and local disaster risk
reduction strategies (cumulative)


160                                                                                         150a                     150
140
120
                                                                     101
100
                                             81
 80
 60                   51

 40
 20
  0
                  2018                     2019                    2020                    2021                    2022
                 (actual)                 (actual)                (actual)               (planned)               (planned)
  a
      To maintain accountability for initial programme plans, the 2021 target is carried forward from the proposed programme
      budget for 2021 and reflects best estimates at that point in time before the COVID -19 pandemic. Programme performance for
      2021 will be reported in the proposed programme budget for 2023.

                      Result 2: accelerating the achievement of Sendai Framework target (e) by increasing the
                      number and quality of national and local disaster risk reduction strategies 7
                      Programme performance in 2020
         27.79        The subprogramme has been providing support to countries in developing and updating their disaster
                      risk reduction strategies to promote compliance with the Sendai Framework principles and enhance
                      their quality and effectiveness. The subprogramme has also been providing technical assistance and
                      training to help governments develop monitoring frameworks for disaster risk reduction strategies
                      through support for the collection of data on risks and the establishment and updating of databases
                      on disaster losses. In addition, the subprogramme has specifically focused on integrating biological
                      hazards and health issues into national disaster risk reduction strategies in order to assist
                      governments in readjusting their policies in the light of the COVID -19 pandemic.
         27.80        The above-mentioned work contributed to increasing the average index measuring the alignment of
                      national strategies with the Sendai Framework to 0.69, which almost met the target of 0.70 reflected
                      in the proposed programme budget for 2021. The registration of new national strategies with lower
                      alignment indexes contributed to a reduction in the average score.

                      Proposed programme plan for 2022
         27.81        The subprogramme will continue the work related to the planned result, in line with its mandate. To
                      contribute to further progress towards the objective, the subprogramme will provide further technical
                      assistance on new or upcoming national disaster risk reduction strategies to increase their alignment
                      with the Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction. The expected progress is presented in the
                      performance measure below (see figure 27.IV).




             __________________
                  7
                      As reflected in the proposed programme budget for 2021 (A/75/6 (Sect. 27) and A/75/6 (Sect. 27)/Corr.1).

21-04597                                                                                                                         25/67
Part VI             Humanitarian assistance

Figure 27.IV
Performance measure: average score of alignment of national strategies with the Sendai Framework

                                                                                        0.75a                  0.75
0.75

                                                                 0.69
0.70
                                          0.66
                    0.65
0.65

0.60

0.55

0.50
                 2018                    2019                   2020                    2021                   2022
                (actual)                (actual)               (actual)               (planned)              (planned)
 a
     To maintain accountability for initial programme plans, the 2021 target is carried forward from the proposed programme
     budget for 2021 and reflects best estimates at that point in time before the COVID -19 pandemic. Programme performance for
     2021 will be reported in the proposed programme budget for 2023.

                    Result 3: scale up resilience at the local level through global partnership
        27.82       The initial Making Cities Resilient campaign concluded at the end of 2020. Campaign partners and
                    cities have asked for a follow-up programme that moves beyond advocacy and awareness-raising to
                    support cities in assessing their resilience status, accelerati ng the development of local disaster risk
                    reduction strategies and integrating disaster risk reduction with climate change adaption and
                    sustainable development, and then implementing the risk-informed strategy in line with the national
                    strategy and with support from local, regional and global partners. Consultations led by the United
                    Nations Office for Disaster Risk Reduction identified that cities are seeking guidance on capacity
                    development in various technical areas that range from awareness and strategi c planning to the
                    effective implementation of risk-informed urban development plans.

                    Lessons learned and planned change
        27.83       An external evaluation of the initial Making Cities Resilient campaign completed in 2020 8 concluded
                    that political, administrative and technical leadership drive actions and partnerships both within and
                    outside a city’s authority. The lesson for the subprogramme was that galvanizing such broad support
                    requires investments in space and time, not just for city leadership but als o to motivate the
                    participation of regulators, associations, civil society, academia and the private sector. In applying
                    the lesson, the subprogramme will respond to the increasing need for a systemic, joined -up approach
                    to risk reduction at the local level. Therefore, in partnership with UN-Habitat, the subprogramme
                    will strengthen coordination and collaboration of partners globally and regionally. It will enhance
                    communication and outreach to support cities with regard to developing resilience road maps a nd
                    promoting engagement with partners, and strengthen horizontal, vertical and city -to-city linkages to
                    enhance local resilience. The subprogramme will leverage an alliance of partners from all sectors,
                    including private sector entities, to support cities and local governments in developing and
                    implementing risk-informed plans, aiming for more resilient and sustainable development.

                    Expected progress towards the attainment of the objective, and performance measure
        27.84       This work is expected to contribute to the objective, as demonstrated by 61 cities developing local
                    disaster risk reduction plans (see figure 27.V).

           __________________
                8
                    John Ievers, “End of action evaluation: Making Cities Sustainable and Resilient: Implementing the Sendai
                    Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction 2015–2030 at the Local Level”, May 2020.

26/67                                                                                                                          21-04597
Section 27        Humanitarian assistance

Figure 27.V
Performance measure: total number of cities that develop local disaster risk reduction plans (cumulative)


80
70                                                                                                                    61
60                                                                                             56
                                                                      51
50                                         41
40
30
20
10                6

 0
              2018                        2019                       2020                2021 (planned)         2022 (planned)
             (actual)                    (actual)                   (actual)


                  Legislative mandates

         27.85    The list below provides all mandates entrusted to the subprogramme.

General Assembly resolutions
54/219                  International Decade for Natural Disaster                               developing States through the
                        Reduction: successor arrangements                                       implementation of the SIDS Accelerated
                                                                                                Modalities of Action (SAMOA) Pathway
56/195; 64/200          International Strategy for Disaster Reduction
                                                                               74/4             Political declaration of the high-level
69/283                  Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk                                      political forum on sustainable development
                        Reduction 2015–2030                                                     convened under the auspices of the General
70/203                  World Tsunami Awareness Day                                             Assembly
72/218; 73/231;         Disaster risk reduction                                74/15            Political Declaration of the High-level
74/218; 75/216                                                                                  Midterm Review on the Implementation of
73/230                  Effective global response to address the                                the Vienna Programme of Action for
                        impacts of the El Niño phenomenon                                       Landlocked Developing Countries for the
                                                                                                Decade 2014–2024
74/3                    Political declaration of the high-level
                        meeting to review progress made in                     75/227           Follow-up to the Fourth United Nations
                        addressing the priorities of small island                               Conference on the Least Developed Countries

Economic and Social Council resolution and intergovernmentally agreed conclusion
2018/14                 Strategic Framework on Geospatial                      E/FFDF/2020/3    Follow-up and review of the financing for
                        Information and Services for Disasters                                  development outcomes and the means of
                                                                                                implementation of the 2030 Agenda for
                                                                                                Sustainable Development


                  Deliverables

         27.86    Table 27.11 lists all deliverables, by category and subcategory, for the period 2020 –2022 that
                  contributed and are expected to contribute to the attainment of the objective stated above.




21-04597                                                                                                                              27/67
Part VI           Humanitarian assistance

Table 27.11
Subprogramme 3: deliverables for the period 2020–2022, by category and subcategory

                                                                                                     2020      2020       2021      2022
Category and subcategory                                                                          planned     actual   planned   planned


A. Facilitation of the intergovernmental process and expert bodies
    Parliamentary documentation (number of documents)                                                   3         2         2           2
    1. Report to the General Assembly on the implementation of the Sendai Framework for
       Disaster Risk Reduction 2015–2030                                                                1         1         1           1
    2. Provision of substantive and technical support to General Assembly (Second
       Committee) resolution negotiations on disaster risk reduction (annual) and effective
       global response to address the impacts of the El Niño phenomenon (biennial)                      2         1         1           1
    Substantive services for meetings (number of three-hour meetings)                                   1         1         1           1
    3. General Assembly plenary (Second Committee), agenda item on sustainable
       development.                                                                                     1         1         1           1
B. Generation and transfer of knowledge
    Field and technical cooperation projects (number of projects)                                      29        30        29        30
    4. National, regional and interregional projects related to the implementation of the
       Sendai Framework                                                                                29        30        29        30
    Seminars, workshops and training events (number of days)                                         323       332        323       330
    5. Capacity development training and workshops for regional, national and local
       disaster risk reduction planning and implementation and monitoring of the Sendai
       Framework                                                                                     323       332        323       330
    Publications (number of publications)                                                               3         2         5           3
    6. Global Assessment Report on Disaster Risk Reduction and Global Assessment Report
       special reports                                                                                  1         –         1           1
    7. United Nations Office for Disaster Risk Reduction annual report                                  1         1         1           1
    8. United Nations Office for Disaster Risk Reduction biennial work programme and
       strategic framework                                                                              –         –         2           –
    9. United Nations Plan of Action on Disaster Risk Reduction for Resilience: Towards a
       Risk-informed and Integrated Approach to Sustainable Development (progress report)               1         1         1           1
    Technical materials (number of materials)                                                          11        14        14        15
    10. Best practices, standards, guidance and other tools to promote learning and
        knowledge-sharing for the monitoring and implementation of the Sendai Framework                 6        10        10        10
    11. Policy guidance on the application of risk knowledge                                            –         4         1           4
    12. Outcome documents of the regional and global platforms                                          5         –         3           1
C. Substantive deliverables
    Consultation, advice and advocacy: provide advice and support related to the formulation and improvement of 50 regional,
    national and local disaster risk reduction strategies and plans as well as advice formulated on 5 national early warning syst ems
    and mechanisms; support for risk governance capacities of 14 regional and subregional intergovernme ntal organizations;
    facilitate the implementation of the United Nations Plan of Action on Disaster Risk Reduction for Resilience: Towards a Risk -
    informed and Integrated Approach to Sustainable Development; support private sector in risk analytics for risk -informed
    decision-making and risk reduction through partnership with the Insurance Development Forum and engagement in the
    InsuResilience Global Partnership; advocate for policy coherence on disaster risk reduction across sectors, including through
    engagement with the Conference of States Parties on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities, the multi -stakeholder forum on
    science, technology and innovation for the Sustainable Development Goals and the Economic and Social Council integration
    segment, and other intergovernmental processes, to advance the implementation of the Sendai Framework.
    Databases and substantive digital materials: maintenance and further enhancement of the Sendai Framework monitor for
    monitoring and reporting on progress against the Sendai Framework targets; assistance in establishing and managing disaster
    loss databases for 120 countries and territories.




28/67                                                                                                                            21-04597
Section 27        Humanitarian assistance


                                                                                                      2020      2020       2021      2022
Category and subcategory                                                                           planned     actual   planned   planned


D. Communication deliverables
    Outreach programmes, special events and informative materials: organization of high-level global and regional meetings on
    disaster risk reduction; World Tsunami Awareness Day events; Sendai Seven Campaign: Seven Targets, Seven Years/International
    Day for Disaster Reduction events; and newsletters, press releases and notes verbales on Sendai Framework monitoring publishe d
    and/or disseminated.
    External and media relations: high-level advocacy of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for Disaster Risk
    Reduction through high-level advocacy missions, press releases, op-eds, web stories, social media posts, videos and press coverage.
    Digital platforms and multimedia content: maintenance and further enhancement of PreventionWeb, the online knowledge
    platform for disaster risk reduction; maintenance and enhancement of the Sendai Framework voluntary commitments online
    platform with more than 75 voluntary commitments recorded.



                  Subprogramme 4
                  Emergency support services

                  Objective

        27.87     The objective, to which this subprogramme contributes, is to expedite international humanitarian
                  assistance to victims of emergencies and natural disasters.


                  Strategy

        27.88     To contribute to the objective, the subprogramme will provide effective and well-coordinated
                  operational response support to conflict- and disaster-affected countries. In line with its mandate, the
                  subprogramme will continue to coordinate and support humanitarian actors to prepare for, plan,
                  deliver and monitor the humanitarian response through the humanitarian programme cycle. Through
                  the management of various technical response services, including the United Nations Disaster
                  Assessment and Coordination Team mechanism, the International Search and Rescue Advisory Group
                  system, the environmental emergency response mechanism of the Joint Environment Unit of the
                  United Nations Environment Programme and the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs,
                  and United Nations humanitarian civil-military coordination services, the subprogramme will provide
                  support to strengthen and build the capacities of Member State mechanisms for emergency response.
                  It will promote the membership of developing and disaster-prone countries in various emergency
                  response networks and promote collaboration with various operational partners, including partners in
                  the private sector. The subprogramme will also standardize and improve operational procedures for
                  international urban search and rescue teams through the International Search and Rescue Advisory
                  Group network and activate and coordinate rapid response coordination platforms such as the virtual
                  On-Site Operations Coordination Centre and the Global Disaster Alert and Response Coordination
                  System, as well as provide near real-time alerts on natural disasters around the world and tools to
                  facilitate response coordination. The subprogramme will also further strengthen the coordination
                  capacity of international responders through the provision of training, guidance and technical support.
                  This will include a continued focus on the effective facilitation and functioning of inter-cluster
                  coordination groups and their associated subgroups, and on the role and capacity of local responders.
        27.89     The above-mentioned work is expected to result in:
                  (a)      Enhanced response capacity of local, regional and international responders;
                  (b)      More efficient and timely mobilization and deployment of emergency response services;
                  (c)      Improved effectiveness and prioritization, expanding the reach of humanitarian action and
                           ensuring that assistance and protection reach the people who need it most.



21-04597                                                                                                                           29/67
Part VI           Humanitarian assistance

                  Programme performance in 2020

        27.90     Programme performance in 2020 includes the below result that emerged during 2020, as well as
                  programme performance presented under results 1 and 2 below.

                  Emergency response services delivered within 48 hours despite COVID-19
        27.91     On 4 August 2020, a massive explosion occurred at a warehouse at the port of Beirut. The blast
                  caused widespread damage, reportedly killing at least 200 people, injuring approximately 6,500
                  others and leaving some 300,000 homeless. The subprogramme coordinated international
                  humanitarian rapid response efforts by providing a suite of comprehensive emergency response
                  services to support the Government of Lebanon in the emergency response. Upon the request of the
                  Humanitarian Coordinator on 5 August, emergency relief teams and experts were alerted through the
                  virtual On-Site Operations Coordination Centre platform. The first urb an search and rescue team
                  arrived in Lebanon that same day, followed by a 19-member United Nations Disaster Assessment
                  and Coordination Team deployed in support of the Government’s response efforts. Technical partners
                  with expertise in logistics, environment, security, mapping, customs facilitation, assessment and
                  analysis were mobilized and provided both on-site and remote support, together with the Disaster
                  Assessment and Coordination Team. The subprogramme also facilitated the coherent engagement of
                  private sector actors, in close collaboration with the Connecting Business initiative and the United
                  Nations Global Compact. A Gender Adviser from the United Nations Entity for Gender Equality and
                  the Empowerment of Women (UN-Women) was also embedded in the operations centre and worked
                  closely with other emergency response actors. The Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
                  Affairs facilitated interaction with the Lebanese Armed Forces on behalf of the Humanitarian
                  Coordinator and the humanitarian country team, and likewise supported coordination between the
                  United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon and humanitarian actors on the ground.
          27.92   The operational environment for humanitarian assistance in Beirut was challenging, given the presence
                  of hazardous chemicals spread by the blast, safety and security issues and the pandemic-related
                  restrictions imposed by governments that limited travel and imposed quarantines. Despite these
                  challenges, the subprogramme established a humanitarian coordination structure to support the response
                  efforts of the Lebanese authorities within 48 hours of the explosion. The coordination structure included
                  an inter-agency emergency operations cell that addressed various coordination issues such as civil -
                  military coordination, environment, search and rescue, and assessments and analysis. This humanitarian
                  coordination structure coexisted with the broader coordination architecture of the existing Lebanon
                  Crisis Response Plan and the Lebanon COVID-19 Emergency Appeal.

                  Progress towards the attainment of the objective, and performance measure
        27.93     The above-mentioned work contributed to the objective, as demonstrated by 100 per cent of requests
                  for international assistance in which United Nations Disaster Assessment and Coordinatio n Teams
                  were mobilized and dispatched to the affected country within 48 hours of receiving the request (see
                  figure 27.VI).




30/67                                                                                                               21-04597
Section 27           Humanitarian assistance

Figure 27.VI
Performance measure: percentage of requests for international assistance in which United Nations Disaster
Assessment and Coordination Teams were mobilized and dispatched to the affected country within 48 hours
of receiving the request

                            100                                    100                                100
100
 90
 80
 70
 60
 50
 40
 30
 20
 10
  0
                          2018                                   2019                                2020
                         (actual)                               (actual)                            (actual)


                     Planned results for 2022

       27.94         The planned results for 2022 include results 1 and 2, which are updates of results pr esented in the
                     preceding proposed programme plans and therefore show both the programme performance in 2020
                     and the proposed programme plan for 2022. Result 3 is a new planned result.

                     Result 1: enhanced capacity for rapid response coordination9
                     Programme performance in 2020
       27.95         To prepare for rapid response in both sudden and slow -onset emergencies, the subprogramme has
                     been managing different emergency response mechanisms that address various humanitarian
                     response requirements. One of these is the International Search and Rescue Advisory Group network,
                     whose primary purpose is to facilitate coordination among the international urban search and rescue
                     teams that make themselves available for deployment to countries experienc ing the devastating
                     effects of structural collapse resulting primarily from earthquakes.
       27.96         The subprogramme, as the secretariat of the International Search and Rescue Advisory Group
                     network, supports the capacity-building of Member States in the area of international search and
                     rescue. This is accomplished through the Advisory Group’s first responders programme and national
                     accreditation, and international urban search and rescue teams’ external classification systems. The
                     globally accepted standards promote cooperation among the national disaster management networks
                     and guide countries in their disaster preparedness and response capacities based on the International
                     Search and Rescue Advisory Group guidelines and methodology endorsed by Member States. The
                     urban search and rescue teams are certified by the subprogramme as having met international
                     standards that guarantee quality and add value with regard to augmenting national efforts.
                     International Search and Rescue Advisory Group teams were at the fro nt line during most of 2020
                     and continued to support the efforts of Member States to combat COVID -19 by utilizing the teams’
                     urban search and rescue medical elements to strengthen the national medical system. In addition, the
                     Advisory Group network actively engaged in virtual technical workshops and meetings to share good
                     practices in field operations in a pandemic environment. After the port of Beirut explosion on
                     4 August 2020, over a dozen Advisory Group teams immediately responded to support the
                     Government-led life-saving operations and damage assessments of affected buildings. Virtual
                     training of first responders on minimum accepted standards for quality preparedness and response
             __________________
                 9
                     As reflected in the proposed programme budget for 2020 ( A/74/6 (Sect. 27)).

21-04597                                                                                                             31/67
Part VI               Humanitarian assistance

                      was provided to Iraqi first responders. The regional chairs and a technica l working group of the
                      Advisory Group network organized various technical workshops and training events that included
                      the launch of the 2020 version of the International Search and Rescue Advisory Group guidelines
                      and technical guidance on non-clinical COVID-19 field response good practices.
         27.97        The above-mentioned work contributed to 56 national governments and urban search and rescue
                      teams adopting the International Search and Rescue Advisory Group methodology for preparedness
                      and response at the national and international levels, which did not meet the target of 70 national
                      governments and urban search and rescue teams adopting the Advisory Group methodology reflected
                      in the proposed programme budget for 2020. The 2020 target could not be met owing to operational
                      challenges posed by the COVID-19 pandemic, such as travel restrictions and limitations on
                      gatherings and meetings. The certification process requires the physical presence of the assessment
                      team and face-to-face interaction, and cannot be done through virtual processes. The lower number
                      of certified teams in 2020 has implications for the planned 2021 and 2022 targets. The target for
                      2022 has been revised downward to account for the impacts of COVID -19.

                      Proposed programme plan for 2022
         27.98        The subprogramme will continue the work related to the planned result, in line with its mandate. To
                      contribute to further progress towards the objective, the subprogramme will assist governments in
                      enhancing their capacity to deliver improved urban search and rescue responses by coordinating
                      training and simulation exercises on urban search and rescue processes. Owing to capacity
                      constraints, the target number of additionally certified search and rescue teams will be adjusted for
                      2022. The expected progress is presented in the performance measure below (see table 27.12).

Table 27.12
Performance measure

2018 (actual)                    2019 (actual)            2020 (actual)              2021 (planned) a         2022 (planned)


Improved                         Training                 Adoption by 56             Adoption by 73           Adoption by 60
interoperability                 methodologies and        national                   national                 national
among urban search               products for search      governments and            governments and          governments and
and rescue teams is              and rescue teams         urban search and           urban search and         urban search and
defined as one of the            are harmonized and       rescue teams of            rescue teams of          rescue teams of
priorities for                   updated to               International              International            International Search
International Search             strengthen               Search and Rescue          Search and Rescue        and Rescue
and Rescue Advisory              interoperability of      Advisory Group             Advisory Group           Advisory Group
Group training                   response                 methodology for            methodology for          methodology for
                                 mechanisms               preparedness and           preparedness and         preparedness and
                                                          response at the            response at the          response at the
                                                          national and               national and             national and
                                                          international levels       international levels     international levels

  a
      To maintain accountability for initial programme plans, the 2021 target is carried forward from the proposed programme
      budget for 2021 and reflects best estimates at that point in time before the COVID-19 pandemic. Programme performance for
      2021 will be reported in the proposed programme budget for 2023.

                      Result 2: strengthened rapid response capacities through standardized and improved
                      response methodologies10
                      Programme performance in 2020
         27.99        The subprogramme has been supporting the timely and effective deployment of United Nations
                      Disaster Assessment and Coordination Teams as well as strengthening countries’ rapid response
            __________________
                 10
                      As reflected in the proposed programme budget for 2021 (A/75/6 (Sect. 27) and A/75/6 (Sect. 27)/Corr.1).

32/67                                                                                                                            21-04597
Section 27          Humanitarian assistance

                    capacities by providing training sessions on coherent and standardized methodologies to responders
                    for more than two decades. In 2020, the subprogramme focused on maintaining its rapid response
                    capacity in the pandemic context by undertaking various preparedness and ca pacity-building
                    measures. These measures included developing operational procedures and tools for remote support,
                    mapping the response capacities of the relevant response networks, facilitating information exchange
                    and dialogue among Disaster Assessment and Coordination Team members across the globe, and
                    pre-positioning required personal protective equipment for Team members.
       27.100       In response to the restrictions resulting from measures to contain the COVID -19 pandemic, the
                    subprogramme developed a series of online response training methodologies and piloted an online
                    methodology course in December 2020.
       27.101       The above-mentioned work contributed to a total of 98 United Nations Disaster Assessment and
                    Coordination Team members being trained in the application of local and regional emergency
                    preparedness and response approaches, which did not meet the target of 120 Team members reflected
                    in the proposed programme budget for 2021. The subprogramme had planned to train 30 additional
                    local, national, regional and global responders on improved United Nations Disaster Assessment and
                    Coordination system methodology. While most of the planned face -to-face training sessions were
                    cancelled or postponed as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, the subprogramme carried out one
                    online training course and trained eight responders in a pilot virtual course.

                    Proposed programme plan for 2022
        27.102      The subprogramme will continue the work related to the planned result, in line with its mandate. To
                    contribute to further progress towards the objective, the subprogramme will train an additional 40
                    responders at the local, national and international levels in 2022, focusing on localized response
                    methodologies. The expected progress is presented in the performance mea sure below (see
                    figure 27.VII).

Figure 27.VII
Performance measure: total number of United Nations Disaster Assessment and Coordination Team
members trained in the application of local and regional emergency preparedness and response
approaches (cumulative)


200                                                                                                           178
180
160                                                                                   150a
140
120                                                             98
100                                       90
 80
 60
 40
 20               N/A
  0
                  2018                  2019                  2020                    2021                  2022
                 (actual)              (actual)              (actual)               (planned)             (planned)

  a
      To maintain accountability for initial programme plans, the 2021 target is carried forward from the proposed programme
      budget for 2021 and reflects best estimates at that point in time before the COVID -19 pandemic. Programme performance for
      2021 will be reported in the proposed programme budget for 2023.

                    Result 3: enhanced partnership with the private sector in collective humanitarian action
                    Proposed programme plan for 2022
       27.103       Over the past few decades, the humanitarian community has increasingly engaged with the private
                    sector to strengthen emergency preparedness and response. Local and multinational companies can

21-04597                                                                                                                     33/67
Part VI          Humanitarian assistance

                 support humanitarian efforts through their core business solutio ns, or by providing in-kind and
                 financial contributions, engaging in advocacy and engaging their staff, clients, network and local
                 communities in resilience-building activities. Recognizing the important role played by the private
                 sector in the local community, the subprogramme has been engaging with the private sector
                 strategically through the Connecting Business initiative, a joint initiative of the Office for the
                 Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs and UNDP that engages the private sector at the interse ction
                 of humanitarian, development and peace efforts. For instance, when the Philippines, in addition to
                 dealing with the COVID-19 pandemic, was hit by Typhoon Goni and Typhoon Vamco in November
                 2020, the Connecting Business initiative member network in th e Philippines collaborated with the
                 Government and the United Nations system during the triple crisis response situation. The Philippine
                 Disaster Resilience Foundation joined a joint rapid damage and needs assessment and analysis team.
                 The network also monitored the situation through their 24/7 private sector-run emergency operations
                 centre and shared warnings with the rest of the responders.
        27.104   The subprogramme supported 14 local private sector networks in responding to the COVID -19
                 pandemic and 21 other emergencies in various countries in 2020, which ranged from storms and
                 cyclones to earthquakes, fires, flooding, volcanic eruptions and conflict and displacement, including
                 in Haiti, Madagascar, the Philippines, Sri Lanka and Vanuatu. The subprogramme supported the
                 work of the Connecting Business initiative to facilitate the creation and strengthening of private
                 sector-led networks for disaster risk reduction, emergency preparedness, response and recovery, as
                 well as connected private sector networks at the subnational, national and regional levels.

                 Lessons learned and planned change
        27.105   The lesson for the subprogramme was that local response mechanisms are particularly essential in
                 situations such as the COVID-19 pandemic when the traditional response mechanisms are not able
                 to deploy. Member networks of the Connecting Business initiative have increasingly demonstrated
                 their value as first responders and key stakeholders in humanitarian response efforts while working
                 closely with humanitarian and government response mechanisms and local communities. In applying
                 the lesson, the subprogramme will continue to transform the way the private sector engages before,
                 during and after emergencies, increasing the scale and effectiveness of the response in a coordinated
                 manner. In 2022, the subprogramme will further encourage and build the capacity of private sector
                 networks to integrate a gender perspective into their disaster management programming. The
                 subprogramme will dedicate specialist support to strengthen private sector networks in conflict-
                 affected areas and in countries at risk of lapsing or relapsing into conflict, and will catalyse multi -
                 stakeholder partnerships to better integrate community engagement and accountability with regard
                 to affected populations.
        27.106   This work is expected to contribute to the objective, as demonstrated by 18 local private sector
                 networks supported by the Connecting Business initiative that respond to crises in collaboration with
                 the United Nations and government agencies (see figure 27.VIII).




34/67                                                                                                             21-04597
Section 27       Humanitarian assistance

Figure 27.VIII
Performance measure: total number of Connecting Business initiative-supported local private sector
networks that respond to crises (cumulative)


20                                                                                                            18
18                                                                                    16
16                                                                   14
14
12
10                                         9
 8               7
 6
 4
 2
 0
              2018                      2019                    2020                 2021                   2022
             (actual)                  (actual)                (actual)            (planned)              (planned)

Note: Subject to the actual number of crises that materialize in 2021 and 2022.


                 Legislative mandates

        27.107   The list below provides all mandates entrusted to the subprogramme.

General Assembly resolutions
56/99                Emergency response to disasters                      68/99      Strengthening of international cooperation
60/13                Strengthening emergency relief,                                 and coordination of efforts to study, mitigate
                     rehabilitation, reconstruction and prevention                   and minimize the consequences of the
                     in the aftermath of the South Asian                             Chernobyl disaster
                     earthquake disaster – Pakistan                       69/280     Strengthening emergency relief,
63/137               Strengthening emergency relief,                                 rehabilitation and reconstruction in response
                     rehabilitation, reconstruction and prevention                   to the devastating effects of the earthquake in
                     in the aftermath of the Indian Ocean tsunami                    Nepal
                     disaster                                             74/114     Persistent legacy of the Chernobyl disaster
65/307               Improving the effectiveness and coordination
                     of military and civil defence assets for
                     natural disaster response


                 Deliverables

        27.108   Table 27.13 lists all deliverables, by category and subcategory, for the period 2020–2022 that
                 contributed and are expected to contribute to the attainment of the objective stated above.




21-04597                                                                                                                       35/67
Part VI           Humanitarian assistance

Table 27.13
Subprogramme 4: deliverables for the period 2020–2022, by category and subcategory

Category and subcategory                                                       2020 planned   2020 actual   2021 planned   2022 planned


B. Generation and transfer of knowledge
    Field and technical cooperation projects (number of projects)                        5             5              5                5
    1. Project on interoperability of response tools and procedures                      1             1              1                1
    2. Projects on response capacity-building                                            4             4              4                4
    Seminars, workshops and training events (number of days)                            50            43             50             50
    3. Regional and international training sessions, workshops and
       simulation exercises on various response services and field
       coordination (e.g., United Nations Disaster Assessment and
       Coordination Team; United Nations humanitarian civil-military
       coordination; environmental emergency response; International
       Search and Rescue Advisory Group; humanitarian programme
       cycle)                                                                           50            43             50             50
C. Substantive deliverables
    Consultation, advice and advocacy: advisory services to 70 key stakeholders and Member States on rapid response
    coordination, including United Nations humanitarian civil-military coordination and integrating environmental considerations
    into humanitarian response.
    Humanitarian assistance missions: 5–10 United Nations humanitarian civil-military coordination support missions annually
    (upon request); 3–10 United Nations Disaster Assessment and Coordination Team missions annually (subject to occurrence of
    disasters and at the request of disaster-affected governments or humanitarian country teams); provision of humanitarian
    coordination support for emergency core relief; and provision of technical supp ort for rapid assessment and emergency
    preparedness planning.
    Databases and substantive digital materials: guidance, tools and handbooks on humanitarian coordination response services
    annually, including: revision of International Search and Rescue Adviso ry Group guidelines; update and maintenance of
    electronic tools related to rapid response and humanitarian coordination; update and maintenance of the roster for humanitari an
    coordinators.
D. Communication deliverables
    Outreach programmes, special events and information materials: annual partnership and outreach event to facilitate
    collaboration and interoperability among 2,000 stakeholders, including humanitarian responders; and approximately 3 –5 norms/
    guidance/tools on emergency response services annually.
    Digital platforms and multimedia content: update and maintenance of websites dedicated to various technical humanitarian
    response services.



                  Subprogramme 5
                  Humanitarian emergency information and advocacy

                  Objective

        27.109    The objective, to which this subprogramme contributes, is to ensure effective advocacy of
                  humanitarian principles and knowledge-sharing in serving populations affected by disasters and
                  emergencies.


                  Strategy

        27.110    To contribute to the objective, the subprogramme will intensify its efforts to raise public awareness
                  of international humanitarian law through targeted communications, clear and accessible messages,
                  proactive media engagement and more field-oriented messaging. It will also continue to produce and
                  improve its analytical information products, including the digital humanitarian situation report.


36/67                                                                                                                          21-04597
Section 27     Humanitarian assistance

      27.111   The subprogramme plans to support Member States on issues related to COVID -19 by strengthening
               analytical work to identify and inform humanitarian actors of emerging needs stemming from the
               direct and indirect impacts of the pandemic.
      27.112   The above-mentioned work is expected to result in:
               (a)   Increased respect for international humanitarian law to enhance the protection of affected
                     people and improved unimpeded and unfettered access to humanitarian assistance;
               (b)   An increase in the number of women and girls empowered to participate in and benefit from
                     humanitarian response;
               (c)   Improved humanitarian decisions based on more timely and accurate information on
                     humanitarian crises, including intersectoral analysis of the humanitarian situation and its
                     severity and needs;
               (d)   Humanitarian planning informed by models developed to support COVID -19 response.


               Programme performance in 2020

      27.113   Programme performance in 2020 includes the below result that emerged during 2020, as well as
               programme performance presented under results 1 and 2 below.

               Increased awareness of needs and funding requirements for the response to COVID -19 in
               countries already facing humanitarian crises
      27.114   Since the beginning of the COVID-19 pandemic, the subprogramme has scaled up its advocacy
               support. The subprogramme called on all donors and partners to support the response to the direct
               public health and indirect immediate humanitarian consequences of the pandemic while maintaining
               core support to pre-existing programmes for the most vulnerable, including through United Nations -
               coordinated humanitarian and refugee response plans. The subprogramme imple mented a
               communications plan with partners that encompassed all aspects of strategic communication,
               including outreach using traditional and social media campaigns that amplified the voices of affected
               people. By conveying the concerns and articulating the needs of affected people, the subprogramme
               enabled donor organizations to receive powerful first-hand accounts of the situation of affected
               people.
      27.115   The subprogramme also launched a series of opinion editorials in key donor countries as well as
               affected regions, calling for donors to fund the Global Humanitarian Response Plan for COVID -19.
               After a reported increase in domestic violence in some countries, the subprogramme produced
               editorial content calling for more protection of women and girls. Furt hermore, the subprogramme
               proactively engaged with media and provided briefings to United Nations correspondents to ensure
               strong, well-informed, up-to-date and continuing coverage of the need for global solidarity and
               funding. A total of 41 interviews were conducted with world media. The subprogramme also
               developed and implemented a global advocacy campaign on World Humanitarian Day to honour
               humanitarian workers, who have proven to be “real-life heroes” by risking their lives to help women,
               men and children affected by natural disasters and complex emergencies, including those affected
               by the COVID-19 pandemic. The centrepiece of the campaign, an inspirational film, was seen by
               1,347,000 people on various social media platforms.

               Progress towards the attainment of the objective, and performance measure
      27.116   The above-mentioned work contributed to the objective, as demonstrated by 63 countries receiving
               $3.7 billion for the COVID-19 response in addition to funding for pre-existing humanitarian needs
               included in the 2020 Global Humanitarian Overview, amounting to a total of $17.86 billion as at
               31 December 2020 (see table 27.14).




21-04597                                                                                                       37/67
Part VI               Humanitarian assistance

Table 27.14
Performance measure

2018 (actual)                                     2019 (actual)                             2020 (actual)


–                                                 –                                         63 countries received $3.7 billion
                                                                                            for the COVID-19 response in
                                                                                            addition to funding for pre-existing
                                                                                            humanitarian needs included in the
                                                                                            2020 Global Humanitarian
                                                                                            Overview, amounting to a total of
                                                                                            $17.86 billion as at 31 December
                                                                                            2020


                      Planned results for 2022

        27.117        The planned results for 2022 include results 1 and 2, which are updates of results presented in the
                      preceding proposed programme plans and therefore show both the programme performance in 2020
                      and the proposed programme plan for 2022. Result 3 is a new planned result.

                      Result 1: streamlined information for responders through digital humanitarian situation
                      reports – a faster, more dynamic and analytical tool 11
                      Programme performance in 2020
        27.118        The subprogramme continued its work on the processing of humanitarian information, making
                      analytical content readily available and quickly sharing timely and relevant information on
                      humanitarian situations through various online platforms such as ReliefWeb ( https://reliefweb.int),
                      humanitarianresponse.info, the corporate website of the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
                      Affairs (https://unocha.org) and Humanitarian Data Exchange (https://data.humdata.org/), among
                      others. The subprogramme provided streamlined information to humanitarian partners for timely,
                      effective and principled humanitarian response by offering quick, easily accessed conte nt for readers
                      on a wide range of devices.
        27.119        The above-mentioned work contributed to the use of digital humanitarian situation reports in 25
                      humanitarian crises (see https://reports.unocha.org/), which exceeded the planned target of the use
                      of digital humanitarian situation reports in 11 humanitarian crises reflected in the proposed
                      programme budget for 2020.

                      Proposed programme plan for 2022
        27.120        The subprogramme will continue the work related to the planned result, in line with its mandate. To
                      contribute to further progress towards the objective, the subprogramme will continue to work with
                      partners to further enhance the digital situation reports and the technology that supports them,
                      including strengthening internal accountability to ensure their corporate ownership and appropriate
                      investment. It will conduct a survey to determine the usefulness of its information products,
                      including the digital situation reports. The survey will help determine th e review and updating of the
                      products to meet the needs of partners, including Member States. The expected progress is presented
                      in the performance measure below (see table 27.15).




            __________________
                 11
                      As reflected in the proposed programme budget for 2020 (A/74/6 (Sect. 27)).

38/67                                                                                                                     21-04597
Section 27           Humanitarian assistance

Table 27.15
Performance measure

2018 (actual)                   2019 (actual)            2020 (actual)              2021 (planned) a      2022 (planned)


Use of first digital            Use of digital           Use of digital             Full adoption of      Percentage of
situation reports               humanitarian             humanitarian               digital situation     partners satisfied
piloted in 3                    situation reports in     situation reports in       reports by all        with core
humanitarian crises             7 humanitarian           25 humanitarian            humanitarian crises   information
                                crises                   crises                                           management
                                                                                                          products (including
                                                                                                          the digital situation
                                                                                                          report) for their
                                                                                                          decision-making

  a
      To maintain accountability for initial programme plans, the 2021 target is carried forward from the proposed programme
      budget for 2021 and reflects best estimates at that point in time before the COVID -19 pandemic. Programme performance for
      2021 will be reported in the proposed programme budget for 2023.

                     Result 2: increased availability of humanitarian information for humanitarian
                     response planning 12
                     Programme performance in 2020
       27.121        The subprogramme has consolidated and rationalized the management of some of the main digital
                     services of the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (ReliefWeb,
                     humanitarianresponse.info, Humanitarian Data Exchange) to ensure the availability of humanitarian
                     information to a global audience. In addition, it streamlined the design and branding of the user interfaces
                     of these platforms. The subprogramme also extended technical support to the increased number of the
                     Office’s key digital platforms by providing technologies that are cost-effective, stable and reflect industry
                     good-practice standards. Furthermore, the subprogramme contributed to the development of the digital
                     version of the annual Global Humanitarian Overview (https://gho.unocha.org/) to make it more widely
                     available online, with dynamic content.
       27.122        The above-mentioned work contributed to an increase in the number of users of ReliefWeb to
                     15 million, which exceeded the planned target of 12 million users reflected in the proposed
                     programme budget for 2021.

                     Proposed programme plan for 2022
       27.123        The subprogramme will continue the work-related to the planned result, in line with its mandate. To
                     contribute to further progress towards the objective, the subprogramme will consolidate the
                     databases underlying ReliefWeb, humanitarianresponse.info and the corporate website of the Office
                     for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs by centralizing the repository of the Office’s
                     information products. This will provide the humanitarian community with a “single point of truth”
                     for key humanitarian analysis and updates instead of multiple copies of the same content stored
                     among different databases operated by the Office. Users will therefore benefit from the confidence
                     that the content they access through these platforms is authoritative and up to date. In addition, the
                     subprogramme will continue to improve the usability of these platforms for ease of navigation by
                     end users. This will also improve operational efficiency among the different platforms in te rms of
                     both technology and support requirements. The expected progress is presented in the performance
                     measure below (see figure 27.IX).


             __________________
                12
                     As reflected in the proposed programme budget for 2021 ( A/75/6 (Sect. 27) and
                     A/75/6 (Sect. 27)/Corr.1).

21-04597                                                                                                                     39/67
Part VI               Humanitarian assistance

Figure 27.IX
Performance measure: increased use of ReliefWeb by global audience
(Millions of users)



20
                                                                                                            17.5
18
16                                                            15.0
14                                                                                  13.0a
12                                        10.0
10                9.0
 8
 6
 4
 2
 0
                 2018                    2019                2020                   2021                   2022
                (actual)                (actual)            (actual)              (planned)              (planned)
  a
      To maintain accountability for initial programme plans, the 2021 target is carried forward from the proposed programme
      budget for 2021 and reflects best estimates at that point in time before the COVID -19 pandemic. Programme performance for
      2021 will be reported in the proposed programme budget for 2023.

                      Result 3: improved humanitarian response planning for secondary impacts of COVID -19 on
                      other infectious diseases
                      Proposed programme plan for 2022
        27.124        The COVID-19 pandemic has brought into stark focus the need for data and the value of models to
                      inform response strategies. In 2020, the subprogramme, in collaboration with the Johns Hopkins
                      University Applied Physics Laboratory, developed a COVID-19 model adapted for humanitarian
                      contexts that forecast the number of cases, hospitalizations and deaths over two or four weeks, at the
                      subnational and national levels. The model facilitated short -term operational decision-making of the
                      Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs and partners that supported Member States with
                      regard to effectively coordinating humanitarian response and reducing loss of life in humanitarian
                      crises, as it enabled the projection of needs, which aided resource mobilization and the prioritization
                      of interventions.

                      Lessons learned and planned change
        27.125        The lesson for the subprogramme was that the immediate impacts of the COVID -19 crisis could have
                      an effect on other infectious diseases, which was discovered when examining the impacts of various
                      strategies on disease spread and evidence on the interdependence of various diseases during the
                      development of the initial model. In applying the lesson, the subprogramme will build on its work
                      in 2020 to model the secondary impacts of COVID-19 and develop mitigation strategies with regard
                      to the prevalence of and capacity to treat other infectious diseases, such as measles, malaria and
                      cholera. The model will also be useful in supporting effective planning across humanitarian
                      operations. The model will project the path of infectious diseases across 3 to 12 months to inform
                      the resource planning and allocation efforts of humanitarian actors. In 2022, the model will be used
                      to support humanitarian planning in six humanitarian crises, depending on the occurrence of crises
                      and the availability of data.

                      Expected progress towards the attainment of the objective, and performance measure
        27.126        This work is expected to contribute to the objective, as demonstrated by improved humanitarian
                      response planning owing to the use of the expanded model (see table 27.16).




40/67                                                                                                                      21-04597
Section 27        Humanitarian assistance

Table 27.16
Performance measure

2018 (actual)                 2019 (actual)            2020 (actual)              2021 (planned)           2022 (planned)


–                             –                        COVID-19 model             Secondary impacts        Humanitarian
                                                       for humanitarian           of COVID-19 on           response planning is
                                                       contexts,                  other infectious         improved by the use
                                                       forecasting the            diseases defined by      of the expanded
                                                       number of cases,           use of the model         model
                                                       hospitalizations and
                                                       deaths over two or
                                                       four weeks


                  Legislative mandates

      27.127      The list below provides all mandates entrusted to the subprogramme.

General Assembly resolutions
51/194; 57/153       Strengthening of the coordination of
                     emergency humanitarian assistance of the
                     United Nations


                  Deliverables

      27.128      Table 27.17 lists all deliverables, by category and subcategory, for the period 2020 –2022 that
                  contributed and are expected to contribute to the attainment of the objective stated above.

Table 27.17
Subprogramme 5: deliverables for the period 2020–2022, by category and subcategory

Category and subcategory


C. Substantive deliverables
    Consultation, advice and advocacy: support for humanitarian partners to strengthen community engagement; authoritative,
    comprehensive information and analysis on humanitarian needs and response: consolidated information and analysis on crises and
    high-risk countries (e.g., multi-stakeholder intersectoral analysis outputs); quality-assured data for use by more than 1,000
    operational partners; and chairing of a humanitarian communications group that includes both United Nations and NGO mem bers
    to help strengthen advocacy and consistency in messaging and the planning and sequencing of communications content.
    Databases and substantive digital materials: updating and maintenance of field guides, maps and other logistics information
    for more than 1,000 humanitarian operational partners on the ground; establishment of information management standards for
    information exchange in the humanitarian community, reporting templates and guidance, including shared data standards among
    operational partners; databases and electronic tools related to humanitarian response and response coordination; International
    Search and Rescue Advisory Group urban search and rescue directory; and common risk and vulnerability assessment
    methodologies and tools.
D. Communication deliverables
    Outreach programmes, special events and information materials: information materials on advocacy on coordination of
    humanitarian action; organization of World Humanitarian Day and other real or virtual events on humanitarian issues an d
    concerns, including exhibitions, seminars and public events, possibly through digital platforms; use of campaigns, special
    events and traditional and social media to advocate for humanitarian issues and specific emergency situations; and more
    proactive outreach and engagement through new and current digital platforms to inform and mobilize resources and support,
    including by reaching the highly digitized segment of people aged 15 –34 and maximizing awareness and engagement to further
    support people affected by humanitarian crises.


21-04597                                                                                                                       41/67
Part VI           Humanitarian assistance


Category and subcategory


    External and media relations: a proactive approach to media engagement and activity; provide daily updates to United Nations
    correspondents through the noon briefing and deliver the twice-weekly Palais des Nations briefings in Geneva; regular informal
    and formal media briefings around the world, story pitches and interview offers to advocate for assistance for people caught in
    humanitarian crises while showing the value added by the Office’s work; and support for global fundraisin g through a
    comprehensive communications strategy for the launch of the Global Humanitarian Overview (annual consolidated appeals) in
    support of the Central Emergency Response Fund and of pledging conferences for large humanitarian crises.
    Digital platforms and multimedia content: manage and support humanitarian community digital platforms used by a global
    audience of more than 15 million people per year, such as ReliefWeb, humanitarianresponse.info and Humanitarian Data
    Exchange; guidance, templates and training on various reporting products, including situation report and humanitarian snapshot;
    and video and other multimedia content on international humanitarian law, international human rights law, humanitarian
    principles and protection of civilians, including gender-based violence in conflicts.
E. Enabling deliverables
    Information and communications technology: product support for Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
    collaboration services and global information and communications technology group, information and communications
    technology emergency response and business continuity services, business intelligence and data analysis services.




42/67                                                                                                                       21-04597
Section 27           Humanitarian assistance

              B. Proposed post and non-post resource requirements for 2022
                     Overview

        27.129       The proposed regular budget resources for 2022, including the breakdown of resource changes, as
                     applicable, are reflected in tables 27.18 to 27.20.

Table 27.18
Overall: evolution of financial resources by object of expenditure
(Thousands of United States dollars)


                                                                                                  Changes
                                                                                                                                          2022
                                                                                           New/                                       estimate
                                              2020             2021        Technical   expanded                                        (before
Object of expenditure                  expenditure a   appropriation     adjustments   mandates      Other     Total   Percentage   recosting)


Post                                     12 995.8          13 551.1               –          –          –         –            –    13 551.1
Other staff costs                         6 055.2           1 762.4               –          –          –         –            –     1 762.4
Hospitality                                     0.2                2.6            –          –          –         –            –          2.6
Consultants                                  100.1                  –             –          –          –         –            –            –
Travel of staff                              589.4               386.7            –          –     (37.2)    (37.2)        (9.6)       349.5
Contractual services                         485.7               174.6            –          –          –         –            –       174.6
General operating expenses                1 573.3                388.4            –          –          –         –            –       388.4
Supplies and materials                        40.3                26.6            –          –          –         –            –        26.6
Furniture and equipment                      167.1                36.1            –          –          –         –            –        36.1
Improvement of premises                      219.1                  –             –          –          –         –            –            –
Grants and contributions                  1 993.2           1 838.1               –          –          –         –            –     1 838.1
Other                                           2.0                 –             –          –          –         –            –            –

      Total                              24 221.4          18 166.6               –          –     (37.2)    (37.2)        (0.2)    18 129.4

  a
      2020 expenditure includes expenditure for the Office of the United Nations Emergency Ebola Response Coordinator, which
      was discontinued in 2020 and therefore not reflected in the appropriation for 2021 and estimates for 2022.

Table 27.19
Overall: proposed posts and post changes for 2022
(Number of posts)


                                           Number      Details


Approved for 2021                               72     1 USG, 1 ASG, 3 D-2, 4 D-1, 11 P-5, 16 P-4, 14 P-3, 5 P-2/1, 2 GS (PL), 15 GS (OL)
      Post changes
Proposed for 2022                               72     1 USG, 1 ASG, 3 D-2, 4 D-1, 11 P-5, 16 P-4, 14 P-3, 5 P-2/1, 2 GS (PL), 15 GS (OL)




                     Note: The following abbreviations are used in tables and figures: ASG, Assistant -Secretary-General;
                     GS (OL), General Service (Other level); GS (PL), General Service (Principal level); GTA, general
                     temporary assistance; LL, Local level; NPO, National Professional Officer; UNV, United Nations
                     Volunteers; USG, Under-Secretary-General.

21-04597                                                                                                                                43/67
Part VI              Humanitarian assistance

Table 27.20
Overall: proposed posts by category and grade
(Number of posts)


                                                                                     Changes

                                                                 Technical   New/expanded
Category and grade                             2021 approved   adjustments       mandates      Other      Total   2022 proposed


Professional and higher
USG                                                       1             –              –          –          –               1
ASG                                                       1             –              –          –          –               1
D-2                                                       3             –              –          –          –               3
D-1                                                       4             –              –          –          –               4
P-5                                                      11             –              –          –          –              11
P-4                                                      16             –              –          –          –              16
P-3                                                      14             –              –          –          –              14
P-2/1                                                     5             –              –          –          –               5

      Subtotal                                           55             –              –          –          –              55

General Service and related
GS (PL)                                                    2             –              –          –          –               2
GS (OL)                                                  15             –              –          –          –              15

      Subtotal                                           17             –              –          –          –              17

      Total                                              72             –              –          –          –              72


        27.130       Additional details on the distribution of the proposed resources for 2022 are reflected in tables 27.21
                     to 27.23 and figure 27.X.
        27.131       As reflected in tables 27.21 (1) and 27.22 (1), the overall resources proposed for 2022 amount to
                     $18,129,400 before recosting, reflecting a net decrease of $37,200 (or 0.2 per cent) compared with
                     the appropriation for 2021. Resource changes result from on e factor, namely other changes. The
                     proposed level of resources provides for the full, efficient and effective implementation of mandates.




44/67                                                                                                                  21-04597
Section 27          Humanitarian assistance

Table 27.21
Overall: evolution of financial resources by source of funding, component and subprogramme
(Thousands of United States dollars)

             (1)    Regular budget

                                                                                              Changes
                                                                                                                                        2022
                                                                                       New/                                         estimate
                                             2020            2021      Technical   expanded                                          (before
Component/subprogramme                 expenditure   appropriation   adjustments   mandates      Other       Total   Percentage   recosting)


A. Executive direction and
   management
      1. Executive direction and
         management                      2 077.0         1 918.0              –          –      (16.3)      (16.3)       (0.9)     1 901.7
      2. United Nations
         Monitoring Mechanism
         for the Syrian Arab
         Republic                        1 946.4         1 878.2              –          –      (14.6)      (14.6)       (0.8)     1 863.6

      Subtotal, A                        4 023.4         3 796.2              –          –      (30.9)      (30.9)       (0.8)     3 765.3

B. Programme of work
      1. Policy and analysis               647.2           640.3              –          –              –       –            –       640.3
      2. Coordination of
         humanitarian action and
         emergency response              5 316.7         5 610.0              –          –       (1.3)       (1.3)       (0.0)     5 608.7
      3. Natural disaster risk
         reduction                       1 297.2         1 293.4              –          –              –       –            –     1 293.4
      4. Emergency support
         services                        3 296.0         3 410.9              –          –       (4.8)       (4.8)       (0.1)     3 406.1
      5. Humanitarian
         emergency information
         and advocacy                    1 595.6         1 730.2              –          –              –       –            –     1 730.2
      6. Office of the United
         Nations Emergency
         Ebola Response
         Coordinator a                   6 447.4                –             –          –              –       –            –            –

      Subtotal, B                       18 600.1        12 684.8              –          –       (6.1)       (6.1)       (0.0)    12 678.7

C. Programme support                     1 597.9         1 685.6              –          –       (0.2)       (0.2)       (0.0)     1 685.4

      Subtotal, 1                       24 221.4        18 166.6              –          –      (37.2)      (37.2)       (0.2)    18 129.4

  a
      2020 expenditure includes expenditure for the Office of the United Nations Emergency Ebola Response Coordinator, which
      was completed in 2020 and therefore not reflected in the appropriation for 2021 and estimates for 2022.




21-04597                                                                                                                              45/67
Part VI             Humanitarian assistance

              (2)   Extrabudgetary

                                           2020            2021                                                                 2022
Component/subprogramme               expenditure       estimate                                   Change   Percentage       estimate


A. Executive direction and
   management
      1. Executive direction and
         management                        5 775.5     2 857.0                                         –              –     2 857.0

      Subtotal, A                          5 775.5     2 857.0                                         –              –     2 857.0

B. Programme of work
      1. Policy and analysis                649.6      1 026.3                                         –              –     1 026.3
      2. Coordination of
         humanitarian action and
         emergency response a        234 530.2       229 346.9                                         –              –   229 346.9
      3. Natural disaster risk
         reduction                    31 341.6        47 695.0                                         –              –    47 695.0
      4. Emergency support
         services                     24 154.0        25 368.6                                         –              –    25 368.6
      5. Humanitarian
         emergency information
         and advocacy                 17 200.1        15 837.0                                         –              –    15 837.0

      Subtotal, B                    307 875.5       319 273.8                                         –              –   319 273.8

C. Programme support                  21 646.8        24 066.6                                         –              –    24 066.6

      Subtotal, 2                    335 297.8       346 197.4                                         –              –   346 197.4

      Total                          359 519.2       364 364.0                                    (37.2)        (0.0)     364 326.8

  a
      Excludes the estimated allocations (estimated at $1.4 billion in 2022) to fund country -based pooled funds and the Central
      Emergency Response Fund that are used by United Nations and non-United Nations entities to support humanitarian action and
      response efforts in humanitarian emergencies and relief efforts.

Table 27.22
Overall: proposed posts for 2022 by source of funding, component and subprogramme
(Number of posts)

              (1)   Regular budget

                                                                                     Changes

                                                                                    New/
                                                           2021     Technical   expanded                                        2022
Component/subprogramme                                 approved   adjustments   mandates       Other          Total         proposed


A. Executive direction and management
      1. Executive direction and
         management                                           8            –          –           –              –                8

      Subtotal, A                                             8            –          –           –              –                8

B. Programme of work
      1. Policy and analysis                                  3            –          –           –              –                3
      2. Coordination of humanitarian action
         and emergency response                             26             –          –           –              –               26
      3. Natural disaster risk reduction                      1            –          –           –              –                1



46/67                                                                                                                       21-04597
Section 27         Humanitarian assistance


                                                                                Changes

                                                                               New/
                                                     2021      Technical   expanded                                2022
Component/subprogramme                           approved    adjustments   mandates        Other   Total       proposed


    4. Emergency support services                      17             –          –             –      –              17
    5. Humanitarian emergency
       information and advocacy                        10             –          –             –      –              10

    Subtotal, B                                        57             –          –             –      –              57

C. Programme support                                    7             –          –             –      –               7

    Subtotal, 1                                        72             –          –             –      –              72


             (2)   Extrabudgetary

Component/subprogramme                       2021 estimate                                Change           2022 estimate


A. Executive direction and management
    1. Executive direction and
       management                                      12                                     –                      12

    Subtotal, A                                        12                                     –                      12

B. Programme of work
    1. Policy and analysis                              4                                     –                       4
    2. Coordination of humanitarian action
       and emergency response                      1 684                                      –                  1 684
    3. Natural disaster risk reduction                114                                     –                     114
    4. Emergency support services                    100                                      –                    100
    5. Humanitarian emergency
       information and advocacy                        63                                     –                      63

    Subtotal, B                                    1 965                                      –                  1 965

C. Programme support                                   83                                     –                      83

    Subtotal, 2                                    2 060                                      –                  2 060

    Total                                          2 132                                      –                  2 132




21-04597                                                                                                          47/67
Part VI               Humanitarian assistance

Table 27.23
Overall: evolution of financial and post resources
(Thousands of United States dollars/number of posts)


                                                                                                    Changes
                                                                                                                                                          2022
                                                                                            New/                                                      estimate
                                           2020          2021          Technical        expanded                                                       (before
                                     expenditure appropriation       adjustments        mandates           Other         Total     Percentage       recosting)


Financial resources by main category of expenditure
Post                                   12 995.8        13 551.1                 –             –               –              –                –      13 551.1
Non-post                               11 225.6         4 615.5                 –             –           (37.2)       (37.2)            (0.8)        4 578.3

    Total                              24 221.4        18 166.6                 –             –           (37.2)       (37.2)            (0.2)       18 129.4

Post resources by category
Professional and higher                                       55                –             –               –              –                –             55
General Service and related                                   17                –             –               –              –                –             17

    Total                                                     72                –             –               –              –                –             72


Figure 27.X
Distribution of proposed resources for 2022 (before recosting)
(Number of posts/thousands of United States dollars)


    Distribution of posts                         Distribution of financial resources                              Distribution of non-post financial resources
           72 posts                                           $18 129.4                                                              $4 578.3




       USG       1
                                                                                                   1 762.4                Other staff costs
       ASG       1
                                                                                                   2.6                    Hospitality
       D-2       3
                                                                                                   349.5                  Travel of staff
       D-1       4

        P-5      11                                                                                174.6                  Contractual services
                                          Post                             Non-post
                                         13 551.1                           4 578.3
        P-4      16                                                                                388.4                  General operating expenses

        P-3      14
                                                                                                   26.6                   Supplies and materials
        P-2      5
                                                                                                   36.1                   Furniture and equipment
 GS (PL)         2

GS (OL)          15                                                                                1 838.1                Grants and contributions




48/67                                                                                                                                                 21-04597
Section 27        Humanitarian assistance

                  Explanation of variances by factor, component and subprogramme

                  Overall resource changes

                  Other changes
      27.132      As reflected in table 27.21 (1), resource changes reflect a net decrease of $37,200, as follows:
                  (a)   Executive direction and management. The decrease of $30,900 under travel of staff,
                        including $14,600 under the United Nations Monitoring Mechanism for the S yrian Arab
                        Republic, reflects efforts to build back better in order to sustain the increased use of
                        videoconferencing and virtual platforms for meetings and consultations, in lieu of in -person
                        attendance of such events;
                  (b)   Subprogramme 2, Coordination of humanitarian action and emergency response. The
                        decrease of $1,300 under travel of staff reflects efforts to build back better in order to sustain
                        the increased use of videoconferencing and virtual platforms for meetings, in lieu of in -person
                        attendance of such events;
                  (c)   Subprogramme 4, Emergency support services. The decrease of $4,800 under travel of staff
                        reflects efforts to build back better in order to sustain the increased use of videoconferencing
                        and virtual platforms for meetings and consultations, in lieu of in-person attendance of such
                        events;
                  (d)   Programme support. The decrease of $200 under travel of staff reflects efforts to build back
                        better in order to sustain the increased use of videoconferencing and virtual platforms f or
                        meetings and consultations, in lieu of in-person attendance of such events.


                  Extrabudgetary resources

      27.133      As reflected in tables 27.21 (2) and 27.22 (2), the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
                  Affairs expects to continue to receive both cash and in-kind contributions. In 2022, extrabudgetary
                  resources (cash contributions) are estimated at $346,197,400 and would provide for 2,060 posts, as
                  presented in table 27.22 (2). The resources would support humanitarian assistance and disaster ri sk
                  reduction activities, as detailed in the individual components and subprogrammes. Anticipated
                  in-kind contributions would provide for rent-free premises with an estimated value of $281,018 and
                  technical assistance and expert services with an estimated v alue of $339,003. Extrabudgetary
                  resources represent 95.0 per cent of the total resources for this section.
      27.134      The extrabudgetary resources under this section are subject to the oversight of the Office for the
                  Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, which has delegated authority from the Secretary-General.


                  Executive direction and management

             1.   Executive direction and management
      27.135      The role and functions of the Emergency Relief Coordinator were defined by the General Assembly
                  in its resolution 46/182 and streamlined by the Assembly in resolution 52/12 and in the report of the
                  Secretary-General on renewing the United Nations: a programme for reform ( A/51/950), in which
                  he called for the strengthening of three core functions: policy developm ent and coordination on
                  humanitarian issues; advocacy of humanitarian issues with political organs; and coordination of
                  humanitarian emergency response.
      27.136      The executive direction and management component of the Office for the Coordination of
                  Humanitarian Affairs comprises the Office of the Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs
                  and Emergency Relief Coordinator, the Office of the Assistant Secretary -General and Deputy
                  Emergency Relief Coordinator and the United Nations Monitoring Mechanism fo r the Syrian Arab

21-04597                                                                                                             49/67
Part VI          Humanitarian assistance

                 Republic. The Office of the Under-Secretary-General oversees the Internally Displaced Persons
                 Unit. The Office of the Assistant Secretary-General supervises the Evaluation, Oversight and Special
                 Projects Section, the Organizational Development Unit and the Gender Unit.
        27.137   The overall responsibilities of the Office of the Under-Secretary-General are to:
                 (a)   Provide overall direction, management and policy guidance to the offices in New York and
                       Geneva and in the field, including leadership in the coordination of the overall response of the
                       international community to disasters and humanitarian emergencies;
                 (b)   Undertake humanitarian diplomacy with Governments of affected countries, including the
                       facilitation of access to emergency areas for the rapid delivery of humanitarian assistance;
                 (c)   Provide oversight of the humanitarian coordination leadership in the field, as well as
                       management of the field operations;
                 (d)   Lead on the humanitarian finances and resource mobilization functions, manage the emergency
                       services on behalf of the United Nations system and coordinate with Member States, donors
                       and partners;
                 (e)   Facilitate the work of the Inter-Agency Standing Committee in relation to policy development
                       and advocacy in the humanitarian sector;
                 (f)   Act as the main adviser to the Secretary-General on humanitarian issues and cooperate closely
                       with other United Nations offices in the planning and coordination of United Nations
                       humanitarian assistance activities in crisis situations;
                 (g)   Monitor, with the consent of the relevant neighbouring countries of the Syrian Arab Republic,
                       the loading of all humanitarian relief consignments of the United Nations humanitarian
                       agencies and their implementing partners.
        27.138   The overall responsibilities of the Office of the Assistant Secretary-General are to:
                 (a)   Assist the Coordinator of the Executive Committee on Humanitarian Affairs in providing the
                       overall direction, management and supervision of the offices in New York and Geneva, as well
                       as in supporting Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs coordination in the field;
                 (b)   Provide advice to the Office of the Under-Secretary-General on all matters relating to its
                       mandate;
                 (c)   Interact with Member States, intergovernmental organizations, NGO s and operational
                       humanitarian agencies, as well as departments of the Secretariat whose responsibilities
                       encompass peacekeeping, political and economic activities, to facilitate joint responses where
                       applicable;
                 (d)   Oversee the strategic planning and evaluation functions of the Office of the Assistant
                       Secretary-General;
                 (e)   Serve as Chair of the Inter-Agency Standing Committee Working Group and act on behalf of
                       the Emergency Relief Coordinator in his/her absence;
                 (f)   Represent the Under-Secretary-General, as required, in United Nations bodies, organizations
                       and conferences.
        27.139   The Internally Displaced Persons Unit provides strategic advice to the Under-Secretary-General on
                 issues relating to internally displaced persons; takes the lead on the Hi gh-level Panel on Internal
                 Displacement; and engages on intergovernmental processes with the General Assembly, the
                 Economic and Social Council and United Nations entities, and with Member States on issues relating
                 to internally displaced persons. The work is linked with the Secretary-General’s reform initiatives
                 to promote coherence and connectivity between the humanitarian system and reposition the United
                 Nations development system in support of the Sustainable Development Goals and the development
                 of new mechanisms for refugees and migration issues. Furthermore, the Unit coordinates various


50/67                                                                                                           21-04597
Section 27     Humanitarian assistance

               related workstreams in the Inter-Agency Standing Committee, including a light review of support
               for internally displaced persons requested by the Principals of the Comm ittee.
      27.140   The Evaluation, Oversight and Special Projects Section (formerly the Strategy Planning, Evaluation
               and Guidance Section) manages and coordinates internal evaluations of the Office for the
               Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs and inter-agency evaluations, provides secretariat services and
               chairs the Inter-agency Humanitarian Evaluation steering group, coordinates external oversight to
               ensure organization compliance with audits and evaluation recommendations, and coordinates
               organization risk management and business continuity planning.
      27.141   The Organizational Development Unit reviews the organizational structure and functions, provides
               technical advice on cross-functional collaboration and organizational decentralization processes and
               manages institutional reforms of the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs.
      27.142   The Gender Unit coordinates and leads the work of the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
               Affairs on gender equality in humanitarian action and the response to gender-based violence in
               emergencies; strengthens capacities and provides technical guidance, support and training on gender,
               including through its gender community of practice; influences better gender analysis; and supports
               the Office’s work on integrating gender into every stage of the humanitarian programme cycle. The
               Unit also represents the Office in gender-related inter-agency processes and coordinates its reporting
               against relevant global commitments.
      27.143   In accordance with the 2030 Agenda, in particular target 12.6 of the Sustainable Development Goals,
               in which organizations are encouraged to integrate sustainability information into their reporting
               cycle, and in compliance with the cross-cutting mandate set out in paragraph 19 of General Assembly
               resolution 72/219, the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs is integrating
               environmental management practices into its operations. It has taken steps to reduce its
               environmental footprint, in line with the Secretariat-wide initiatives to promote environmental
               sustainability. Measures taken include waste management processes that promote recycling by
               reducing the use of single-use plastics and continuous guidance to countries on conduct ing
               environmental impact assessments in humanitarian action.
      27.144   In 2022, the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs will systematically measure and
               report on environmental performance, on the basis of a mapping of material environmental i mpacts;
               reduce adverse environmental impacts by implementing an environmental management system; and
               maintain climate neutrality through a variety of initiatives. Such initiatives include increasing its use
               of videoconference and remote meeting options, th e consistent review of its vehicle fleet to ensure
               that replacements are made only if required and the use of shared facilities when safe, practical and
               in line with the humanitarian principles, in order to reduce its environmental footprint.
      27.145   Information on compliance with the timely submission of documentation and advance booking for
               air travel is reflected in table 27.24. In 2020, a directive was issued to raise awareness among staff
               and emphasize the importance of and requirement to comply with t he advance purchase rule.
               Managers are asked to implement preventive and monitoring corrective measures. Notwithstanding,
               the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic and related restrictions on travel in 2020 limited the ability
               to comply with advance booking for air travel, which resulted in a lower compliance rate.
               Furthermore, the actual rate for 2020 reflects travel undertaken under the regular budget and
               extrabudgetary funds, which differs from 2019, when the rate was limited to travel funded from the
               regular budget. Compliance rates are monitored, and statistics and trends are distributed to managers
               on a quarterly basis. In 2022, the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs will continue
               to implement the following measures to improve the compliance rate for air tickets: (a) advance
               planning and nomination of travellers; (b) on-boarding of staff planned in advance with
               contingencies in place (e.g., advance request for visas); (c) undertaking communications to staff and
               managers to raise awareness of the requirement; (d) minimizing instances of exceptions; and
               (e) increasing its use of videoconference and remote meeting options.




21-04597                                                                                                           51/67
Part VI             Humanitarian assistance

Table 27.24
Compliance rate
(Percentage)


                                                                                     Actual 2019         Actual 2020       Planned 2021       Planned 2022


Timely submission of documentation                                                          100                 100                100                100
Air tickets purchased at least 2 weeks before the commencement of travel                     68                  22                100                100


        27.146      The proposed regular budget resources for executive direction and management for 2022 amount to
                    $1,901,700 and reflect a decrease of $16,300 compared with the appropriation for 2021. The
                    proposed decrease is explained in paragraph 27.132 (a) above. Additional details on the distribution
                    of resources in 2022 are reflected in table 27.25 and figure 27. XI.

Table 27.25
Executive direction and management: evolution of financial and post resources
(Thousands of United States dollars/number of posts)


                                                                                           Changes
                                                                                                                                                       2022
                                                                                   New/                                                            estimate
                                           2020          2021      Technical   expanded                                                             (before
                                     expenditure appropriation   adjustments   mandates        Other              Total       Percentage         recosting)


Financial resources by main category of expenditure
Post                                    1 783.2        1 748.4            –          –               –                 –                  –       1 748.4
Non-post                                  293.8         169.6             –          –        (16.3)            (16.3)             (9.6)            153.3

    Total                               2 077.0        1 918.0            –          –        (16.3)            (16.3)             (0.9)          1 901.7

Post resources by category
Professional and higher                                     6             –          –               –                 –                  –              6
General Service and related                                 2             –          –               –                 –                  –              2

    Total                                                   8             –          –               –                 –                  –              8




52/67                                                                                                                                             21-04597
Section 27          Humanitarian assistance

Figure 27.XI
Executive direction and management: distribution of proposed resources for 2022 (before recosting)
(Number of posts/thousands of United States dollars)




                    Extrabudgetary resources
      27.147        Extrabudgetary resources for the component are estimated at $2,857,000 and would provide for 12
                    posts (1 D-1, 2 P-5, 4 P-4, 1 P-3, 1 P-2 and 3 General Service (Other level)), as well as non -post
                    resources. The resources would support the Under-Secretary-General and the Assistant Secretary-
                    General in fulfilling their roles in providing overall direction and policy guidance, and facilitation
                    of access to emergency areas for the rapid delivery of humanitarian assistance; and consulting with
                    the donor community and other interested States on issues related to the provision of emergency
                    humanitarian assistance. The resources would also support the coordination of the international
                    community’s response to disasters and emergencies and support the Emergency Relief Coordinator
                    in undertaking humanitarian diplomacy with Governments of affected countries. The resources
                    would also be used for servicing inter-agency meetings, meetings of the Inter-Agency Standing
                    Committee and its working groups and meetings of the Execu tive Committee on Humanitarian
                    Affairs.

             2.     United Nations Monitoring Mechanism for the Syrian Arab Republic
      27.148        The role and functions of the United Nations Monitoring Mechanism for the Syrian Arab Republic
                    were defined by the Security Council in resolution 2165 (2014), in which the Council authorized the
                    United Nations humanitarian agencies and their implementing partners to use the Syrian border
                    crossings of Bab al-Salam and Bab al-Hawa with Turkey, Ya‘rubiyah with Iraq and Ramtha with
                    Jordan in order to ensure that humanitarian assistance reaches people in need throughout the Syrian
                    Arab Republic through the most direct routes, with notification to the Syrian authorities.
      27.149        The Mechanism monitors, with the consent of the relevant neighbouring countries of the Syrian Arab
                    Republic, the loading of all humanitarian relief consignments of the United Nations humanitarian
                    agencies and their implementing partners at the relevant United Nations facilities and any subsequent
                    opening of the consignments by the customs authorities of the relevant neighbouring countries, for
                    passage into the Syrian Arab Republic across the above-mentioned border crossings, in order to
                    confirm the humanitarian nature of the relief consignments. Following the decision of the Security
                    Council to exclude the border crossings of Ramtha, Ya‘rubiyah and Bab al -Salam from the list of

21-04597                                                                                                             53/67
Part VI             Humanitarian assistance

                    authorized crossings, in its resolutions 2504 (2020) and 2533 (2020), the United Nations agencies
                    and their implementing partners rely on the border crossing of Bab al -Hawa to send humanitarian
                    assistance into the Syrian Arab Republic. Accordingly, the Mechanism monitors the loading of the
                    United Nations relief consignments and their passage into the Syrian Arab Republic through that
                    crossing exclusively, provides monthly briefings to the Council and reports on a regular basis, at
                    least every 60 days, on the implementation of the resolutions. The latest report ( S/2021/160) is dated
                    18 February 2021. The Mechanism is comprised of the Office of the Chief, the Monitoring Team
                    and the Support and Security Unit, which are based in Gaziantep, Turkey, and is supported by a
                    Liaison Officer in New York.
        27.150      The proposed regular budget resources for the United Nations Monitoring Mechanism for the Syrian
                    Arab Republic for 2022 under this component amount to $1,863,600 and include 16 general
                    temporary assistance positions (1 D-1, 2 P-4, 3 P-3, 3 P-2, 1 National Professional Officer and
                    6 Local level) and 3 United Nations Volunteers. The proposal reflects a decrease of $14,600
                    compared with the appropriation for 2021. The proposed decrease is explained in
                    paragraph 27.132 (a) above. Additional details on the distribution of resources are reflected in
                    table 27.26 and figure 27.XII.

Table 27.26
United Nations Monitoring Mechanism for the Syrian Arab Republic: evolution of financial and post resources
(Thousands of United States dollars/number of positions)


                                                                                                    Changes
                                                                                                                                           2022
                                                                                             New/                                      estimate
                                                   2020            2021      Technical   expanded                                       (before
                                             expenditure   appropriation   adjustments   mandates      Other    Total   Percentage   recosting)


Financial resources by main category of expenditure
Non-post                                       1 946.4         1 878.2              –          –      (14.6)   (14.6)       (0.8)     1 863.6

    Total                                      1 946.4         1 878.2              –          –      (14.6)   (14.6)       (0.8)     1 863.6

General temporary assistance by category and UNV
Professional and higher                                               9             –          –          –        –            –            9
General service and related                                           7             –          –          –        –            –            7
UNV                                                                   3             –          –          –        –            –            3

    Total                                                            19             –          –          –        –            –           19




54/67                                                                                                                                 21-04597
Section 27           Humanitarian assistance

Figure 27.XII
United Nations Monitoring Mechanism for the Syrian Arab Republic: distribution of proposed resources
for 2022 (before recosting)
(Number of positions/thousands of United States dollars)




                     Programme of work

       27.151        The proposed regular budget resources for 2022 amount to $ 12,678,700 and reflect a decrease of
                     $6,100 compared with the appropriation for 2021. The proposed decrease is explained in
                     paragraph 27.132 (b) and (c) above. The distribution of resources by subprogramme is reflected in
                     figure 27.XIII.

Figure 27.XIII
Distribution of proposed resources for 2022 by subprogramme
(Millions of United States dollars)




21-04597                                                                                                         55/67
Part VI             Humanitarian assistance

                    Subprogramme 1
                    Policy and analysis

        27.152      The proposed regular budget resources for 2022 amount to $640,300 and reflect no change in the
                    resource level compared with the appropriation for 2021. Additional details on the distribution of
                    resources in 2022 are reflected in table 27.27 and figure 27.X IV.

Table 27.27
Subprogramme 1: evolution of financial and post resources
(Thousands of United States dollars/number of posts)


                                                                                                    Changes
                                                                                                                                          2022
                                                                                             New/                                     estimate
                                                   2020            2021      Technical   expanded                                      (before
                                             expenditure   appropriation   adjustments   mandates      Other   Total   Percentage   recosting)


Financial resources by main category of expenditure
Post                                             647.2           640.3              –          –          –       –            –       640.3

    Total                                        647.2           640.3              –          –          –       –            –       640.3

Post resources by category
Professional and higher                                               3             –          –          –       –            –            3

    Total                                                             3             –          –          –       –            –            3


Figure 27.XIV
Subprogramme 1: distribution of proposed resources for 2022 (before recosting)
(Number of posts)




                    Extrabudgetary resources
        27.153      Extrabudgetary resources for the subprogramme are estimated at $1,026,300 and would provide for
                    four posts (2 P-4, 1 P-3 and 1 General Service (Other level)), as well as non -post resources. The
                    resources would provide for the servicing of meetings, seminar s, workshops and training events
                    tailored to improve the strategic and operational coherence of the humanitarian response. They


56/67                                                                                                                                21-04597
Section 27          Humanitarian assistance

                    would also provide for technical materials, such as strategy papers, policy tools and guidance notes
                    for humanitarian agencies, to support the strengthening and further development of a humanitarian
                    policy agenda; and advance the protection of civilians agenda in the Security Council. The resources
                    would further provide for the production of access assessments in times of humanitar ian crisis and
                    the organization of events with academic institutions and NGOs to promote humanitarian assistance
                    and establish and sustain humanitarian access.


                    Subprogramme 2
                    Coordination of humanitarian action and emergency response

       27.154       The proposed regular budget resources for 2022 amount to $5,608,700 and reflect a decrease of
                    $1,300 compared with the appropriation for 2021. Additional details on the distribution of resources
                    in 2022 are reflected in table 27.28 and figure 27.XV.

Table 27.28
Subprogramme 2: evolution of financial and post resources
(Thousands of United States dollars/number of posts)


                                                                                                    Changes
                                                                                                                                          2022
                                                                                             New/                                     estimate
                                                   2020            2021      Technical   expanded                                      (before
                                             expenditure   appropriation   adjustments   mandates      Other   Total   Percentage   recosting)


Financial resources by main category of expenditure
Post                                           4 595.3         4 872.9              –          –          –       –            –     4 872.9
Non-post                                         721.4           737.1              –          –       (1.3)   (1.3)       (0.2)       735.8

    Total                                      5 316.7         5 610.0              –          –       (1.3)   (1.3)       (0.0)     5 608.7

Post resources by category
Professional and higher                                              21             –          –          –       –            –           21
General Service and related                                           5             –          –          –       –            –            5

    Total                                                            26             –          –          –       –            –           26




21-04597                                                                                                                                57/67
Part VI             Humanitarian assistance

Figure 27.XV
Subprogramme 2: distribution of proposed resources for 2022 (before recosting)
(Number of posts/thousands of United States dollars)




                    Extrabudgetary resources
        27.155      Extrabudgetary resources for the subprogramme are estimated at $229,346,900 and would provide
                    for 1,684 posts (27 D-1, 70 P-5, 192 P-4, 225 P-3, 18 P-2, 479 National Professional Officers,
                    28 General Service (Other level) and 645 Local level), as well as non -post resources. The resources
                    would provide for the servicing of meetings, seminars, workshops and training events in order to
                    ensure a coherent, effective and timely humanitarian response to alleviate human suffering in natural
                    disasters and complex emergencies. They would also provide for consultations, advice and advocacy
                    to support effective planning of future emergencies and natural disasters and strengthe n contingency
                    funding arrangements. The resources would continue to support the Emergency Relief Coordinator
                    in coordinating the international community’s response to complex emergencies and natural
                    disasters. This includes creating more predictable fundin g to enable a prompt response to new or
                    rapidly deteriorating crises, including through the further strengthening of the Central Emergency
                    Response Fund and other pooled fund mechanisms; strengthening humanitarian coordination on the
                    ground; and enhancing preparedness activities, including by looking at the humanitarian
                    implications of climate change. Extrabudgetary resources would also be used to fund donor
                    meetings, including informal briefings and consultations with Member States on specific emergency
                    situations and the financing of humanitarian requirements, process grants for new and protracted
                    emergencies by the Central Emergency Response Fund, manage the roster of potential resident and
                    humanitarian coordinators, conduct humanitarian assessment and strategy-building missions to
                    review humanitarian needs and design appropriate response strategies, support inter -agency
                    assessment and strategy-building missions to review field coordination arrangements, provide
                    training on the humanitarian programme cycle for humanitarian partners, and prepare technical
                    materials on the consolidated appeals process.




58/67                                                                                                             21-04597
Section 27          Humanitarian assistance

                    Subprogramme 3
                    Natural disaster risk reduction

       27.156       The proposed regular budget resources for 2022 amount to $1,293,400 and reflect no change in the
                    resource level compared with the appropriation for 2021. Additional details on the distribution of
                    resources in 2022 are reflected in table 27.29 and figure 27.XVI.

Table 27.29
Subprogramme 3: evolution of financial and post resources
(Thousands of United States dollars/number of posts)


                                                                                                    Changes
                                                                                                                                          2022
                                                                                             New/                                     estimate
                                                   2020            2021      Technical   expanded                                      (before
                                             expenditure   appropriation   adjustments   mandates      Other   Total   Percentage   recosting)


Financial resources by main category of expenditure
Post                                             224.1           198.8              –          –          –       –            –       198.8
Non-post                                       1 073.1         1 094.6              –          –          –       –            –     1 094.6

    Total                                      1 297.2         1 293.4              –          –          –       –            –     1 293.4

Post resources by category
Professional and higher
    D-1                                                               1             –          –          –       –            –            1

    Total                                                             1             –          –          –       –            –            1


Figure 27.XVI
Subprogramme 3: distribution of proposed resources for 2022 (before recosting)
(Thousands of United States dollars)




21-04597                                                                                                                                59/67
Part VI             Humanitarian assistance

                    Extrabudgetary resources
        27.157      Extrabudgetary resources for the subprogramme are estimated at $47,695,000 and would provide for
                    114 posts (1 Assistant Secretary-General, 1 D-2, 3 D-1, 13 P-5, 25 P-4, 32 P-3, 2 P-2, 1 General
                    Service (Principal level), 13 General Service (Other level), 1 8 Local level and 5 National
                    Professional Officers), as well as non-post resources. The resources would support the Office for the
                    Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs in the implementation of the Sendai Framework for Disaster
                    Risk Reduction 2015–2030 and cover activities focused on accelerating the implementation of
                    disaster risk reduction actions through, for example, the production and dissemination of knowledge
                    resources and best practices, the provision of technical assistance at the regional, national and local
                    levels, advocacy and capacity development, the dissemination and roll -out of guidelines on how to
                    develop effective national and local disaster risk reduction strategies, and the provision of technical
                    assistance, capacity development and policy guidance to support the implementation of the Sendai
                    Framework.


                    Subprogramme 4
                    Emergency support services

        27.158      The proposed regular budget resources for 2022 amount to $3,406,100 and reflect a decrease of
                    $4,800 compared with the appropriation for 2021. Additional details on the distribution of resources
                    in 2022 are reflected in table 27.30 and figure 27.XVII.

Table 27.30
Subprogramme 4: evolution of financial and post resources
(Thousands of United States dollars/number of posts )


                                                                                                       Changes
                                                                                                                                             2022
                                                                                                New/                                     estimate
                                                   2020               2021      Technical   expanded                                      (before
                                             expenditure      appropriation   adjustments   mandates      Other   Total   Percentage   recosting)


Financial resources by main category of expenditure
Post                                            3 290.6           3 361.2              –          –          –       –            –     3 361.2
Non-post                                                5.3          49.7              –          –       (4.8)   (4.8)       (9.7)        44.9

    Total                                       3 296.0           3 410.9              –          –       (4.8)   (4.8)       (0.1)     3 406.1

Post resources by category
Professional and higher                                                 14             –          –          –       –            –           14
General Service and related                                              3             –          –          –       –            –            3

    Total                                                               17             –          –          –       –            –           17




60/67                                                                                                                                   21-04597
Section 27          Humanitarian assistance

Figure 27.XVII
Subprogramme 4: distribution of proposed resources for 2022 (before recosting)
(Number of posts/thousands of United States dollars)




                    Extrabudgetary resources
      27.159        Extrabudgetary resources for the subprogramme are estimated at $25,368,600 and would provide for
                    100 posts (2 D-1, 12 P-5, 35 P-4, 26 P-3, 2 P-2, 1 National Professional Officer and 22 General
                    Service (Other level)), as well as non-post resources. The resources would provide for seminars,
                    workshops and training events in order to expedite international humanitarian assistance to victims
                    of emergencies and natural disasters. They would cover capacity-building activities, including on
                    search and rescue methodology, to promote the membership of developing and disaster -prone
                    countries in emergency response networks. The resources would also be used to strengthen
                    interoperability initiatives among national, regional and international response mechanisms for more
                    integrated international assistance in support of a Member State affected by a natural disaster.


                    Subprogramme 5
                    Humanitarian emergency information and advocacy

      27.160        The proposed regular budget resources for 2022 amount to $1,730,200 and reflect no change in the
                    resource level compared with the appropriation for 2021. Additional details on the distribution of
                    resources in 2022 are reflected in table 27.31 and figure 27.XVIII.




21-04597                                                                                                           61/67
Part VI             Humanitarian assistance

Table 27.31
Subprogramme 5: evolution of financial and post resources
(Thousands of United States dollars/number of posts)


                                                                                                      Changes
                                                                                                                                            2022
                                                                                               New/                                     estimate
                                                   2020              2021      Technical   expanded                                      (before
                                             expenditure     appropriation   adjustments   mandates      Other   Total   Percentage   recosting)


Financial resources by main category of expenditure
Post                                           1 592.3           1 730.2              –          –          –       –            –     1 730.2
Non-post                                               3.3              –             –          –          –       –            –            –

    Total                                      1 595.6           1 730.2              –          –          –       –            –     1 730.2

Post resources by category
Professional and higher                                                 7             –          –          –       –            –            7
General Service and related                                             3             –          –          –       –            –            3

    Total                                                              10             –          –          –       –            –           10


Figure 27.XVIII
Subprogramme 5: distribution of proposed resources for 2022 (before recosting)
(Number of posts)




                    Extrabudgetary resources
        27.161      Extrabudgetary resources for the subprogramme are estimated at $15,837,000 and would provide for
                    63 posts (1 D-1, 4 P-5, 20 P-4, 20 P-3, 1 P-2, 9 General Service (Other level) and 8 Local level), as
                    well as non-post resources. The resources would enable advocacy of humanitarian principles and
                    international humanitarian law and provide timely and reliable information on unfolding
                    emergencies and natural disasters, including through expanded networks, coverage and reach.




62/67                                                                                                                                  21-04597
Section 27          Humanitarian assistance

                    Programme support

       27.162       The Executive Office of the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs includes the
                    Administrative and Oversight Section, the Human Resources Section, the Supply Chain and
                    Procurement Section, the Duty of Care Unit and the Planning, Budget and Fin ance Section.
       27.163       The Executive Office oversees the financial, human resources, procurement of goods and services,
                    and general administrative aspects of the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs and
                    provides guidance on administrative matters. It supports senior management in formulating policies
                    and instructions, including on financial management, workforce planning, rostering and staff
                    development, and training. It coordinates departmental programme budgets and presentations to
                    legislative bodies. The Executive Office will continue to focus on workforce and succession
                    planning, as well as career and staff development, in line with the human resources strategy. It will
                    also improve financial monitoring and projections of funding requireme nts for future budgets,
                    managing and effectively utilizing resources, capturing and sharing field information and ensuring
                    the accurate and timely reporting of financial transactions. As part of those efforts, the Executive
                    Office will continuously focus on enhancing the service orientation and client focus of its
                    administrative support.
       27.164       The proposed regular budget resources for 2022 amount to $1,685,400 and reflect a decrease of
                    $200 compared with the appropriation for 2021. The proposed decrease i s explained in
                    paragraph 27.132 (d) above. Additional details on the distribution of resources in 2022 are reflected
                    in table 27.32 and figure 27.XIX.

Table 27.32
Programme support: evolution of financial and post resources
(Thousands of United States dollars/number of posts)


                                                                                                    Changes
                                                                                                                                          2022
                                                                                             New/                                     estimate
                                                   2020            2021      Technical   expanded                                      (before
                                             expenditure   appropriation   adjustments   mandates      Other   Total   Percentage   recosting)


Financial resources by main category of expenditure
Post                                             863.1           999.3              –          –          –       –            –       999.3
Non-post                                         734.7           686.3              –          –       (0.2)   (0.2)         0.0       686.1

    Total                                      1 597.9         1 685.6              –          –       (0.2)   (0.2)         0.0     1 685.4

Post resources by category
Professional and higher                                               3             –          –          –       –            –            3
General Service and related                                           4             –          –          –       –            –            4

    Total                                                             7             –          –          –       –            –            7




21-04597                                                                                                                                63/67
Part VI             Humanitarian assistance

Figure 27.XIX
Programme support: distribution of proposed resources for 2022 (before recosting)
(Number of posts/thousands of United States dollars)




                    Extrabudgetary resources
        27.165      Extrabudgetary resources for the component are estimated at $24,066,600 and wo uld provide for
                    83 posts (1 D-1, 2 P-5, 18 P-4, 26 P-3, 1 National Professional Officers, 2 General Service (Principal
                    level), 30 General Service (Other level) and 3 Local level), as well as non -post resources. The
                    resources would allow the component to oversee financial, human resources and general
                    administration of the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs.




64/67                                                                                                              21-04597
Section 27       Humanitarian assistance

Annex I
                 Organizational structure and post distribution for 2022




Abbreviations: ASG, Assistant Secretary-General; GS (OL), General Service (Other level); GS (PL), General Service (Principal level);
    GTA, general temporary assistance; LL, Local level; NPO, National Professional Officer; RB, regular budget; UNV, United Natio ns
    Volunteers; USG, Under-Secretary-General; XB, extrabudgetary.
  a
    Includes posts administered by the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime and field office local positions (National Profes sional
    Officer, Local level and service contract) administered by the United Nations Develo pment Programme on behalf of the Office,
    funded from special purpose funds as at January 2020.




21-04597                                                                                                                          65/67
Part VI            Humanitarian assistance

Annex II
                   Summary of follow-up action taken to implement relevant
                   recommendations of the oversight bodies
Brief description of the recommendation                   Action taken to implement the recommendation


Board of Auditors
A/75/5 (Vol. I), chap. II

The Board recommends that the Administration make         Implementation is in progress. The Administration has
all efforts to achieve the funding targets for country-   included the actions on achieving its funding targets
based pooled funds and continue to proactively            for country-based pooled funds in the resource
advocate the increase of multi-year and unearmarked       mobilization strategy of the Office for the
funding for more predictable financial resources and      Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs for 2018–2021
flexibility (para. 596).                                  and will continue its efforts to work towards meeting
                                                          those targets and increase multi-year funding when
                                                          possible. The Administration would also like to note
                                                          that all funding to country-based pooled funds is
                                                          considered “softly earmarked” funding, according to
                                                          grand bargain definitions, so the recommendation for
                                                          more unearmarked funding does not apply.

The Board recommends that the Office scale up its         Implementation is in progress. The Office continues
engagement with United Nations agencies with regard       its work towards improving financial reports for its
to country-based pooled fund reporting so that there is   managed funds. It will also implement an automated
improvement within a defined time period (para. 606).     data migration of final financials from the United
                                                          Nations agencies with the support of the multi-partner
                                                          trust fund.

The Board recommends that the Office make sustained       Implementation is ongoing. Long-term agreement for
and time-bound efforts to clear the backlog of audits     the audit services has resulted in significant progress
and to ensure that refunds due from implementing          in clearing the backlog of audits in the different funds.
partners are received promptly (para. 618).               Refunds are being closely followed using the grant
                                                          management system refund module. The grant
                                                          management system has introduced the refund alert
                                                          system to notify partners of a refund due.

The Board recommends that the secretariat of the          Implementation is in progress. The Central Emergency
Central Emergency Response Fund engage with               Response Fund secretariat will work with the
implementing agencies to minimize requests for            implementing agencies to ensure fewer no-cost
extension, carefully review such requests and grant       extension requests. However, the operational
extensions only in genuinely exceptional circumstances    environment of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19)
(para. 625).                                              pandemic would require some degree of flexibility.

The Board recommends that the secretariat of the          Implementation is in progress. The Central Emergency
Central Emergency Response Fund pursue the timely         Response Fund secretariat continues its efforts to
completion of financial reports and the refund of         vigorously pursue the timely and full collection of
unspent funds (para. 634).                                financial reports and refunds of unspent funds of Fund
                                                          grants. The Fund vigorously engages with and seeks
                                                          full collaboration of the agencies receiving its grants.




66/67                                                                                                        21-04597
Section 27         Humanitarian assistance


Brief description of the recommendation                     Action taken to implement the recommendation


The Board also recommends that the secretariat of the       Implementation is in progress. The Central Emergency
Central Emergency Response Fund strengthen measures         Response Fund secretariat continues its efforts to
such as training, policy briefings and consultations with   further strengthen measures such as training through
United Nations agencies for better collaboration in         webinars, policy briefings and consultations with
ensuring timely financial reporting and refunds             United Nations agencies. The Fund vigorously
(para. 635).                                                engages with and seeks full collaboration of agencies
                                                            in ensuring timely financial reporting and refunds.

The Board recommends that the Office expedite the           Implementation is in progress. The Office and the
roll-out of the Umoja Extension 2 grantor-country-based     Umoja team are currently testing the first phase of the
pooled funds grant management system bridge and             bridge with the country-based pooled funds grant
explore its utility and customization for the Central       management system. If roll-out is successful in 2021,
Emergency Response Fund to reduce manual                    a similar structure will be implemented via ONE GMS
interventions in the recording of financial transactions    (country-based pooled funds and Central Emergency
and the preparation of trial balances (para. 644).          Response Fund) by the second quarter of 2022.

Advisory Committee on Administrative and
Budgetary Questions
A/75/7 and A/75/Corr.1

The Advisory Committee recommends that the General          Implemented. The report of the Secretary-General on
Assembly request the Secretary-General to include in        the revised estimates for the United Nations
the report on the revised estimates [for the United         Monitoring Mechanism for the Syrian Arab Republic
Nations Monitoring Mechanism for the Syrian Arab            relating to the programme budget for 2021 under
Republic relating to the programme budget for 2021] a       section 27, Humanitarian assistance, and section 36,
detailed breakdown of the financial and staffing            Staff assessment (A/75/372) contained a detailed
requirements and to provide updates to the information      breakdown of the financial and staffing requirements
presented in paragraphs VI.49 to VI.51 and in tables        and provided updates to the information presented in
VI.5 and VI.6 of the Committee’s previous report            paragraphs VI.49 to VI.51 and in tables VI.5 and VI.6
(A/74/7) (para. VI.54).                                     of the Committee’s previous report (A/74/7).

A/75/7/Add.17

The Advisory Committee notes the proposed                   The 2022 budget proposal reflects the staffing
abolishment of a national position and considers that       structure and functional levels of the positions that
national positions should be retained, when                 would be required to continue the implementation of
operationally feasible. Furthermore, the Committee          the existing Security Council mandate. Any changes to
recalls that further to its resolutions 61/276 and 66/24,   the mandate would result in a subsequent review of
the General Assembly, in resolution 74/263, had             the current resources, including staffing structure, and
requested the Secretary-General to continue his efforts     revisions if applicable. In such cases, the United
to promote the nationalization of positions, whenever       Nations Monitoring Mechanism for the Syrian Arab
appropriate (see also A/75/7/Add.2, para. 53) (para. 7).    Republic would continue its efforts to promote the
                                                            nationalization of positions, whenever appropriate.

The Advisory Committee considers that in order to           The 2022 budget proposal reflects the staffing
ensure that the operational needs of the Monitoring         structure and functional levels of the positions that
Mechanism are met and that mandate delivery is              would be required to continue the implementation of
assured, there is a continued need to review and adjust     the existing Security Council mandate. Any changes to
the staffing structure and the functional levels of the     the mandate would result in a subsequent review of
positions. The Committee recommends that the General        the current resources, including staffing structure, and
Assembly request the Secretary-General to include           revisions if applicable.
information thereon in the next report (para. 8).




21-04597                                                                                                        67/67
