[Extract: chapter on Programme 23, Humanitarian assistance, from A/76/16 (Report of the Committee for Programme and Coordination). Lines 5218-5395 of the full pdftotext -layout output; the rest of the report is not reproduced.]

          Programme 23
          Humanitarian assistance

          467. The Committee considered the proposed programme plan for 2022 and
          programme performance information for 2020 of programme 23, Humanitarian
          assistance (A/76/6 (Sect. 27)).
          468. The Chair drew attention to the statement of the representative of the Secretary -
          General introducing the programme. Representatives of the Secretary -General
          responded to questions raised by the Committee during its consideration of the
          programme.

          Discussion
          469. Delegations expressed appreciation and strong support for the work of the
          Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs and the United Nations Office
          for Disaster Risk Reduction. It was noted that the Office for the Coordination of
          Humanitarian Affairs played an indispensable role in coordinating principled
          humanitarian action to ensure coherent, effective and consistent system -wide
          response strategies that met the humanitarian needs of affected people and minimized
          duplication and gaps in response efforts, and in facilitating the transition from
          emergency relief to rehabilitation and sustainable development. Appreciation was
          also expressed for the work of the Office in ensuring effective advocacy of
          humanitarian principles and respect for international humanitarian law. The work
          carried out by the United Nations Office for Disaster Risk Reduction in leading and
          ensuring synergies among the disaster reduction activities of the United Nations
          system and regional organizations and activities in the socioeconomic and
          humanitarian fields was also recognized. With the world facing an unprecedented
          humanitarian crisis resulting from the triple threat of conflict, climate ch ange and the
          COVID-19 pandemic, and with around 237 million people worldwide who would
          need humanitarian assistance in the year ahead, it was emphasized that the work of
          the two offices was more important than ever.
          470. A delegation welcomed the leadership of the Office for the Coordination of
          Humanitarian Affairs in anticipatory and early action to mitigate the impacts of
          impending humanitarian crises and expressed support for the Office’s intention to
          scale up work in that area through the Central Emergency Response Fund and to
          further prove the effectiveness of anticipating the impact of humanitarian shocks,
          such as drought, floods and pest infestation. Another delegation noted that that area
          of work was of huge interest to donors and of critical importance to beneficiaries
          living in disaster-prone areas, and additional information on the Office’s work in that
          area was requested. A delegation emphasized that robust support for the Office was a
          priority to ensure that it was equipped and empowered to fulfil its critical mandate of
          coordinating humanitarian assistance for an unprecedented number of people in need
          around the world.
          471. Appreciation was expressed for the detailed outline of the results achieved in
          2020 and the clear goals set by the Office for 2022. Support was also expressed for
          the planned activities reflected in the programme, and a delegation expressed its


98/141                                                                                                21-09411
                                                                                                     A/76/16

           support for the triple nexus and the need to increase collaboration between peace,
           development and humanitarian actors. Another delegation indicated its intention to
           provide amendments to certain formulations in the programme narrative to reflect
           agreed language, in particular on gender, the nexus and humanitarian access, among
           other issues. Another delegation noted the lack of reference to youth in the programme
           and expressed the view that it would be useful to see some deliverables and activities
           targeting youth across the subprogrammes, particularly in the light of the growing
           number of youth and their active participation in society.
           472. A delegation expressed gratitude for the response efforts of the Office during
           the pandemic and acknowledged the work undertaken by staff at Headquarters and
           especially in the field, where staff had stayed and delivered under drastic
           humanitarian circumstances to ensure that those most in need and the most vulnerable
           received aid and did not lose hope. Another delegation highlighted that the pandemic
           had exacerbated existing vulnerabilities and created new needs that had to be
           addressed in a timely manner. The delegation praised the work carried out in spite of
           increased access restrictions, and expressed regret that, in some cases, access
           restrictions were not connected to health and safety measures but were the result of
           politicization and instrumentalization in the delivery of humanitarian assistance. It
           was emphasized that unimpeded humanitarian access was a must and that
           humanitarian assistance should be accessible to all people in need, including in
           conflict-affected areas, in accordance with the principles of neutrality, impartiality
           and independence. Moreover, it was stressed that the humanitarian response should
           neither threaten the safety of affected people nor further humiliate their dignity. The
           Office was invited to comment on challenges related to access restrictions.
           473. The importance of how innovation and technology improved the effectiveness
           of humanitarian assistance was recognized by a delegation, which also noted the
           challenges caused by the pandemic on that issue, and, in that regard, the delegation
           sought clarification on how the Office would focus on and prioritize the issue in 2022.
           Another delegation stressed the importance of looking for ways to further enhance
           multilateral collaboration on disaster forecasting technologies and th e equitable
           distribution of disaster warnings, including to marginalized communities. In that
           context, the delegation looked forward to engaging on those issues, in particular as
           they related to the Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction 2015 –2030,
           disaster risk reduction in general and humanitarian responses around the world, and
           drew attention to the Global Platform for Disaster Risk Reduction to be held in
           Indonesia in 2022.
           474. Another delegation expressed its support for the “One World Protected ” virtual
           event, which had raised $2.4 billion and secured 1.8 billion doses of COVID -19
           vaccines for lower-income countries participating in the COVID-19 Vaccine Global
           Access Facility in 2021 and 2022, including for United Nations personnel.
           475. A delegation expressed support for the efforts of the Office to increase the
           participation of women, local representatives and affected populations in needs
           assessments and response planning. The delegation also expressed support for the
           participation of those groups in the Office’s briefings to the Security Council on
           Yemen, the Syrian Arab Republic, Ethiopia and other humanitarian crises.
           476. A question was raised and further clarification sought on the relocation of a
           number of posts from the Geneva office of the Office for the Coordination of
           Humanitarian Affairs to Istanbul, Turkey. A point of order was raised by another
           delegation, which indicated that questions on the relocation of posts fell outside the
           scope of the Committee. In addition, the Chair emphasized that questions relating to
           parts of the programme dealing with resources were not within the mandate of the



21-09411                                                                                             99/141
A/76/16

          Committee and called upon the Committee to focus the discussion on the programme
          plan and programme performance information.
          477. A question was raised on the role played by the Office in the immediate
          aftermath of the disaster related to the recent volcanic eruption of Nyiragongo in the
          Democratic Republic of the Congo and whether there had been a timely response,
          and, if so, whether an update could be provided on current activities in that respect.
          478. With regard to the programme’s overall orientation, a delegation sought
          clarification as to whether the evaluation on mainstreaming gender equality and
          empowerment of women and girls into the humanitarian, development and peace
          nexus, which was supposed to have been completed in 2021, had been completed or
          was still under implementation and, if the latter, what the expected time frame for
          completion was.
          479. In respect of the strategy and external factors, appreciation and support were
          expressed for the efforts undertaken by the Office on the prevention of sexual
          exploitation and abuse and sexual harassment, and on build -back-better efforts to
          increase the use of videoconferencing and virtual platforms for meetings and
          consultations.
          480. In respect of subprogramme 1, Policy and analysis, a delegation noted that close
          coordination and collaboration between partners were key to ensuring the
          effectiveness and efficiency of humanitarian assistance, referenced under result 1:
          increased collaboration between humanitarian and development partners at the
          country level. The same delegation noted the increased number of countries that had
          defined the common strategies, as referenced in paragraph 27.35 and ta ble 27.3 on
          performance measures, and sought further clarification on the lessons learned from
          year to year. In respect of table 27.3, another delegation sought clarification on the
          list of the countries in which humanitarian and development partners were to
          strengthen existing complementary programming and funding to implement a
          common strategy and which countries might adopt early action frameworks.
          481. In respect of paragraph 27.39, a delegation expressed its concern that the
          planned target of testing initiatives for technology and innovation in selected
          humanitarian response contexts had not been accomplished as initially planned in the
          proposed programme budget for 2021, owing to the refocusing of priorities towards
          the COVID-19 response during 2020. The delegation requested further clarification
          on the programmes and initiatives planned.
          482. Concerning result 2: how technology may shape the humanitarian operating
          environment, a delegation expressed its concern that among the number of elements
          that were mentioned, reference to drones was not included.
          483. In respect of subprogramme 2, Coordination of humanitarian action and
          emergency response, a delegation expressed support for the plans to strengthen
          linkages between humanitarian assistance and resilience, early recovery and
          development work and requested further information on what the Office saw as the
          barriers to collaboration in strengthening those linkages. The same delegation
          expressed support for the Office’s plan to develop two more early acti on frameworks
          in 2022, as reflected in the performance measure in table 27.8.
          484. In respect of subprogramme 3, Natural disaster risk reduction, a delegation
          sought clarification on the number of deliverables reflected in table 27.11, specifically
          on the organization of 330 seminars, workshops and training events planned for 2022.
          The delegation sought clarification on how that would be achieved during the year,
          which had 365 days, and expressed its view that it would be unrealistic.



100/141                                                                                               21-09411
                                                                                                    A/76/16

           485. In respect of subprogramme 5, Humanitarian emergency information and
           advocacy, a delegation expressed support for the work of the Office and stressed the
           importance of information and advocacy. The delegation expressed the view that the
           Office’s work to increase respect for international humanitarian law in order to
           enhance the protection of affected people and improve access to humanitarian
           assistance was vital, as was its work to produce more timely and accurate information
           on humanitarian crises. The delegation sought further clarification on how taking that
           work forward would be affected by the challenge of the COVID -19 crisis.

           Conclusions and recommendations
           486. The Committee recommended that the General Assembly, at its seventy-
           sixth session, review the programme plan of programme 23, Humanitarian
           assistance, of the proposed programme budget for 2022, under the agenda item
           entitled “Programme planning”.
