[Extract: chapter on Programme 23, Humanitarian assistance, from A/77/16 (Report of the Committee for Programme and Coordination). Lines 6161-6457 of the full pdftotext -layout output; the rest of the report is not reproduced.]

           Programme 23
           Humanitarian assistance

           607. At its 13th meeting, on 7 June 2022, the Committee considered programme 23,
           Humanitarian assistance, of the proposed programme plan for 2023 and programme
           performance information for 2021 (A/77/6 (Sect. 27)).



 114/167                                                                                               22-10653
                                                                                                        A/77/16

           608. The representative of the Secretary-General introduced the programme and,
           together with other representatives of the Secretary-General, responded to questions
           raised by the Committee during its consideration of the programme.

           Discussion
           609. Delegations expressed appreciation and support for the work of the Office for
           the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs and the United Nations Office for Disaster
           Risk Reduction. It was noted that the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
           Affairs played an indispensable role in coordinating principled humanitarian action
           and ensured that coherent, effective and consistent system -wide response strategies
           met the humanitarian needs of affected people and minimized duplication and gaps in
           response efforts. Some delegations expressed appreciation and firm support for the
           critical leadership role that the Office played in ensuring timely, coherent, coordinated
           and principled international responses to humanitarian emergencies and noted that
           effective coordination was a force multiplier and essential in the complex
           environments in which humanitarian responses took place. It was further noted that
           the proposed programme plan for 2023 was succinct and well structured and had a
           clear format.
           610. Delegations expressed concern about the increase in the number of people in
           need of humanitarian assistance as a result of the COVID -19 pandemic, armed
           conflicts and the climate crisis. A delegation acknowledged the significant impact of
           the pandemic on the substantive work and operations of the Office, expressed the
           view that such events could become increasingly common and, in that regard, sought
           clarification on how the Office planned to integrate le ssons learned from the response
           to the pandemic into future responses. The delegation also sought clarification on how
           the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs intended to manage the
           increased demand for its services and the related impact on its proposed programme
           plan for 2023.
           611. A delegation commended the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
           Affairs for coping with the “new normal” and its role in ensuring that people in need
           of humanitarian assistance received such assistance despite the challenges for the
           United Nations humanitarian response system. The delegation expressed its gratitude
           to the leadership of the Office for the efforts made to save lives. Another delegation
           acknowledged the substantial increase in the number of people needing humanitarian
           aid in recent years and noted the substantial increase in its Government’s contribution
           to the humanitarian budget in order to address the crisis. The delegation recalled that
           its Government had allocated 60 per cent of its humanitarian budget flexibly. Another
           delegation emphasized the need for strengthened international cooperation to respond
           to the urgency and magnitude of those challenges.
           612. A delegation welcomed the progress made by the Office for the Coordination of
           Humanitarian Affairs in critical areas such as the Joint Intersectoral Analysis
           Framework and the increased use of anticipatory approaches. The delegation also
           welcomed the continued focus on those areas, including the initiatives led by the
           Office to enhance the gathering, sharing and analysis of data to ensure
           methodologically sound, evidence-based and informed strategic decisions on
           humanitarian responses and the prioritization of limited humanitarian resources.
           Another delegation recalled the importance of establishing priorities, notably in the
           humanitarian response, that would allow donors to ensure that resources were tailored
           to the most important needs. The delegation supported the use of new technologies
           on the ground and the implementation of a precise methodology for assessment and
           analysis using lessons learned from Haiti. Another delegation welcomed the efforts
           made by the Office to improve its policy and analysis activity with innovative
           technology solutions.

22-10653                                                                                               115/167
A/77/16

           613. A delegation said that, while the impact of climate change was becoming
           undeniable, particularly for vulnerable communities, it did not concur with the
           approach of linking the issues of international security and climate change. The
           delegation emphasized that the key link made should have been between the
           environment and development and that the issue of climate change should have been
           addressed in the context of sustainable development. The same delegation stated that
           the focus on the humanitarian consequences of the climate crisis through out the
           proposed programme plan did not accurately reflect the fact that many of the
           humanitarian crises had a political origin, and the delegation sought the views of the
           Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs on the issue.
           614. A delegation highlighted the fact that the Office for the Coordination of
           Humanitarian Affairs led the humanitarian community, through the Inter-Agency
           Standing Committee, to take early action on and contribute to community resilience
           to climate disasters. Delegations emphasized the importance of the Sendai Framework
           for Disaster Risk Reduction 2015–2030 in responding to the challenges of the climate
           crisis.
           615. Some delegations welcomed the inclusion of gender perspectives in the
           operational activities of the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs and
           emphasized the importance of women’s participation and leadership in humanitarian
           assistance. A delegation acknowledged the efforts of the Office in providing
           protection to vulnerable people from exploitatio n and abuse. Another delegation
           welcomed the efforts of the Office in providing protection against sexual harassment
           and exploitation and encouraged United Nations agencies to continue such efforts.
           616. A delegation expressed concern that the proposed programme plan for 2023
           included terms and concepts that had not been intergovernmentally agreed, citing as
           examples the use of the terminology on climate and the intra-Secretariat manual on
           gender policy. The delegation emphasized that the regular budget was funded by
           Member States and that, as such, its resources should be utilized only for the
           implementation of the decisions agreed upon by Member States, as reflected in the
           documents of the General Assembly and the Economic and Social Council.
           617. With regard to subprogramme 1, Policy and analysis, a delegation sought
           clarification as to which mandate formed the basis for the use of the term
           “humanitarian crisis” reflected in table 27.5 of the proposed programme plan for
           2023. The same delegation cited deliverable 9 in section B of table 27.6 of the
           proposed programme plan for 2023 and sought clarification on the relationship
           between the political, humanitarian assistance and human rights dimensions of the
           United Nations response to crises.
           618. With regard to subprogramme 2, Coordination of humanitarian action and
           emergency response, a delegation noted that the share of humanitarian response plans
           that were 75 per cent funded remained below target according to result 1, an enhanced
           Global Humanitarian Overview, and the delegation sought clarification on how the
           Office planned to effectively address that gap. Another delegation questioned the
           reference to General Assembly resolution 75/90, on the situation in Afghanistan, that
           was included under the legislative mandates and sought clarification on the
           significance or relevance of the resolution to the proposed programme plan. With
           regard to paragraph 27.37 (c) and table 27.9 of the proposed programme plan for
           2023, a delegation sought clarification as to whether the term “early action” referred
           to an early warning system. Another delegation said that it would have appreciated
           the inclusion of a reference to target countries or more context in relation to the
           locations in which the Office was planning to develop early action and anticipatory
           approaches.



 116/167                                                                                            22-10653
                                                                                                     A/77/16

           619. With regard to subprogramme 3, Disaster risk reduction, a delegation welcomed
           the progress made by the subprogramme in scaling up resilience at the local level
           through global partnerships and expressed hope that the progress would continue.
           Another delegation cited paragraph 27.83 of the proposed programme plan for 2023
           and said that it would have appreciated the inclusion of a reference to the alignment
           of the ReliefWeb service with the International Aid Transparency Initiative. The
           delegation advised that it would consider submitting written proposals in that regard.

           Conclusions and recommendations
           620. The Committee commended the work carried out by the Office in the face
           of increasing humanitarian needs and challenges.
           621. The Committee appreciated the efforts of the Office and recommended that
           the General Assembly encourage the Office to continue to ensure the timely,
           coherent, coordinated and principled response of the international community
           to natural disasters and complex emergencies and to continue to facilitate the
           transition from emergency relief to rehabilitation and sustainable development.
           622. The Committee underlined the importance of better integrating disaster
           risk reduction into humanitarian response and noted that the United Nations
           Office for Disaster Risk Reduction would continue to strengthen its coordinating
           role within the United Nations system, including its support to United Nations
           country teams and resident coordinators in integrating disaster risk reduction
           and resilience into common country analyses and the United Nations Sustainable
           Development Cooperation Framework.
           623. The Committee also underlined the importance of anticipatory approaches
           and early warning early action systems, and the need to improve them in the
           humanitarian system, and of scaling up resilience in cooperation and
           collaboration with national Governments.
           624. The Committee recommended that the General Assembly approve the
           programme narrative of programme 23, Humanitarian assistance, of the
           proposed programme budget for 2023, subject to the following modifications:

                Overall orientation
                Strategy and external factors for 2023
                Paragraph 27.5
                    Replace “to demand change” with “to actively participate in efforts
                aimed at disaster risk reduction”.
                      Replace “the seventh session of the Global Platform for Disaster Risk
                Reduction. The Global Platform, which will be hosted by Indonesia, will
                assess and take stock” with “the midterm review of the Sendai Framework
                for Disaster Risk Reduction 2015–2030. In the outcome of its seventh
                session, the Global Platform for Disaster Risk Reduction assessed progress
                and took stock”.

                Paragraph 27.13
                      Delete the phrase “, including the Inter-Agency Standing Committee
                policies and standby capacities, its Gender Handbook in Humanitarian
                Action and its Gender Standby Capacity Project”.




22-10653                                                                                            117/167
A/77/16

           Paragraph 27.15
                   Replace “In line with” with “Recalling”.

           Subprogramme 1
           Policy and analysis
           Paragraph 27.25
                At the end of the first sentence, replace “climate disasters” with
           “climate and weather extremes and disasters”.
                Delete “No Return to Normal: The Growing Humanitarian Climate
           Crises,”.
                Delete “The findings covered, among others, humanitarian impacts of
           climate change and recommendations for addressing those challenges”.

           Planned results for 2023
           Result 2
           Paragraph 27.29
                After “The subprogramme’s work”, insert “, which met the planned
           target,”.
                   Before “in line with” insert “and which were also”.
                After “Global Humanitarian Policy Forum”, delete “which met the
           planned target”.

           Result 3
           Title
                   Replace “climate change crisis” with “crisis of climate change”.

           Paragraph 27.31
               Delete “, “No return to normal: realities and opportunities of the
           growing humanitarian climate crisis”,”.

           Paragraph 27.32
               In the last sentence, replace “climate crisis” with “crisis of climate
           change”.

           Paragraph 27.33
               In the first sentence, replace “climate crisis” with “crisis of climate
           change”.

           Table 27.5
           Column “2021 (actual)”
                   Replace “climate crisis” with “crisis of climate change”.

           Column “2022 (planned)”
                   Replace “climate crisis” with “crisis of climate change”.



 118/167                                                                                 22-10653
                                                                                                A/77/16

                Column “2023 (planned)”
                        Replace “climate crisis” with “crisis of climate change”.

                Table 27.6
           B.   Generation and transfer of knowledge
                Deliverable 9
                     Replace “On the relation among the political, humanitarian assistance
                and human rights dimensions of the United Nations response to crises” with
                “On humanitarian assistance in the context of the multidimensional United
                Nations response to crises”.

                Subprogramme 2
                Coordination of humanitarian action and emergency response
                Paragraph 27.37 (c)
                     Replace “early action and anticipatory approaches”                with
                “anticipatory approaches and early warning early action systems”.
                     Replace “especially to climate-related disasters” with “especially to
                disasters related to climate change”.

                Planned results for 2023
                Result 3
                Title
                    Replace “early action anticipatory approaches” with “anticipatory
                approaches and early warning early action systems”.

                Paragraph 27.46
                        Replace “climate crisis” with “crisis of climate change”.
                        Replace “climatic” with “environmental”.

                Paragraph 27.47
                        Replace “climatic” with “environmental”.

                Table 27.9
                Column “2023 (planned)”
                     Replace “early action and anticipatory approaches”                with
                “anticipatory approaches and early action early warning systems”.
                     Replace “especially to climate-related natural disasters” with
                “especially to disasters related to climate change”.

                Subprogramme 3
                Disaster risk reduction
                Paragraph 27.52 (d)
                        Replace “prevention” with “disaster risk prevention and adaptation”.




22-10653                                                                                       119/167
A/77/16

                Paragraph 27.52 (f)
                      After “climate” insert “change”.

                Paragraph 27.52 (g)
                      Replace “climate emergency” with “crisis of climate change”.
                     Replace     “climate   risk-informed”     with   “climate    change    risk-
                informed”.

                Paragraph 27.60
                     Replace “vulnerable segments of the population” with “the most
                vulnerable”.

                Paragraph 27.61
                      Replace “climate scenarios” with “climate change scenarios”.
                      Replace “climate-sensitive” with “climate-change”.
