[Extract: chapter on Programme 23, Humanitarian assistance, from A/78/16 (Report of the Committee for Programme and Coordination). Lines 6272-6743 of the full pdftotext -layout output; the rest of the report is not reproduced.]

                   Programme 23
                   Humanitarian assistance

                   718. At its 15th meeting, on 8 June 2023, the Committee considered programme 23,
                   Humanitarian assistance, of the proposed programme plan for 2024 and programme
                   performance in 2022 (A/78/6 (Sect. 27)).
                   719. Representatives of the Secretary-General introduced the programme and
                   responded to questions raised by the Committee during its consideration of the
                   programme.

                   Discussion
                   720. Delegations expressed appreciation and support for the work of the Office for
                   the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs and the United Nations Office for Disaster
                   Risk Reduction, underscored the critical leadership role undertaken by both offices in
                   the provision of international response to humanitarian emergencies and in that regard
                   welcomed the presentation of the respective programme plans for 2024. A delegation
                   expressed its view that the capacities of both institutions should be strengthened in
                   all phases of their work, including preparedness, mitigation, operational response and
                   rehabilitation.
           __________________
               2
                   A/66/692, annex.

23-12163                                                                                                    115/160
A/78/16

           721. Some delegations acknowledged the active and indispensable role of the Office
           for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs in coordinating principled humanitarian
           action that ensured coherent, effective and consistent system-wide response strategies
           to meet the humanitarian needs of affected people in vulnerable situations. The
           delegations expressed their full support for the role that the Office played as the key
           organization of the international community to facilitate the transition from
           emergency relief to rehabilitation and sustainable development.
           722. A delegation welcomed the initiatives planned by the Office for the
           Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs to enhance data gathering, sharing and analysis
           to ensure methodologically sound, evidence-based and informed strategic decisions
           on humanitarian response efforts, and the prioritization of limited humanitarian
           resources. In that regard, clarification was sought on how the Office planned, through
           its reform initiatives, to ensure that a quality, inclusive and evidence -based approach
           remained at the core of its humanitarian approach.
           723. A delegation expressed its agreement with the overall strategy and results
           outlined in the programme plan for 2024, including the focus on improved policy and
           analysis, coordination of humanitarian action, humanitarian advocacy, disa ster
           management, risk reduction and resource mobilization, which it opined would enable
           early action. The delegation expressed its view that successful implementation of the
           programme would be possible if the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
           Affairs prioritized its core mandated functions from the humanitarian programme
           cycle to gain access to information management, among others, through a robust field
           presence and headquarters support.
           724. A delegation expressed its appreciation to the United Nations, and specifically
           to the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs and the United Nations
           Office for Disaster Risk Reduction, for the quick mobilization of resources and
           support that it had provided in 2022 when its country had been hit by a hurricane.
           Another delegation expressed its gratitude to the United Nations system and the
           international community for their support provided in the aftermath of a devastating
           flood that had affected millions of lives and livelihoods in its country in 2022. The
           delegation noted that close coordination between the offices and other United Nations
           agencies and bodies was vital for the effective and efficient delivery of humanitarian
           assistance, and further expressed its appreciation for the offices’ comm itment in that
           regard. The delegation opined that the work of providing humanitarian assistance
           would benefit from an equitable global financial architecture that addressed the
           liquidity issues of debt-stressed countries that were facing humanitarian issues, which
           could also help the United Nations in its efforts. The same delegation requested
           further clarification on how the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
           and the United Nations Office for Disaster Risk Reduction planned to improve thei r
           preparedness for timely humanitarian assistance and facilitate the transition from
           relief to rehabilitation.
           725. A delegation highlighted the importance of the coordination function between
           the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, other United Nations
           agencies, funds and programmes, and the United Nations system, which was essential
           in providing effective and efficient assistance during crises. The delegation further
           highlighted that priority should be given to women, children, older persons, persons
           with disabilities, migrants and persons in vulnerable situations. In that regard, the
           delegation expressed appreciation for the relationship between the Office and its
           government through the White Helmets programme, which was aimed at improvin g
           cooperation to reduce disaster risk and provide international humanitarian assistance
           within the current humanitarian frameworks and laws.



 116/160                                                                                              23-12163
                                                                                                        A/78/16

           726. A group of delegations welcomed the programme’s emphasis on the continued
           importance of cooperation and partnerships, including with local-level actors and
           international financial institutions, to enhance collective response to humanitarian
           crises. The delegations further noted the need for the continuous alignment of
           humanitarian, development and peace efforts to achieve shared goals and ensure that
           foreign aid reached more people in crisis. The delegations also acknowledged and
           expressed appreciation for the support and recognized the vital role that local
           humanitarian actors played, including by risking their lives on the front lines of crises
           to bring life-saving aid to millions of people.
           727. A delegation recognized that a number of projects to address humanitarian crises
           could not always keep pace with the impacts of climate change and technological
           advances, and expressed the view that approaches taken should be as comprehensive
           as possible and should comply with international law and international humanitarian
           law.
           728. A delegation recalled that its government had allocated 60 per cent of its
           humanitarian budget in a flexible and predictable way, notably through multi-annual
           contributions to the Central Emergency Response Fund and other pooled funds. The
           same delegation expressed its firm belief that such an approach enabled effective and
           appropriate response to urgent humanitarian needs.
           729. Another delegation noted that the comments provided by its delegation in the
           previous session of the Committee were taken into account. The delegation further
           stated that it would submit additional written amendments to the text.
           730. Under section I, “Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs”, with
           regard to the subsection entitled “Strategy and external factors for 2024”, and
           paragraph 27.7, a delegation welcomed the inclusion of a gender perspective and
           expressed its strong belief that women’s participation and leadership in humanitarian
           assistance was crucial and indispensable. Support was also expressed for the
           increased participation of local women representatives in affected populations in need
           of assessment and response planning, and for their participation in the briefings of
           the Office to the Security Council on the Syrian Arab Republic, Yemen and other
           humanitarian crises. Another delegation commended the inclusion of the reference to
           the most vulnerable in the programme plan, and opined that they were the ones who
           deserved special attention in the post-pandemic period. The delegation expressed its
           view that there was a need to implement a gender approach to humanitarian crises in
           all prevention and response actions since armed conflicts and humanitarian crises
           disproportionately affected women and children. The same delegation stressed the
           importance of focusing on the gender approach and the full and meaningful
           participation of women in decision-making. With regard to the use of the term “early
           action”, a delegation recalled that the term had been a subject of discussion the
           previous year and noted that the approved formulation had been “early warning early
           action systems”. The delegation further stated that it would have appreciated the use
           of the same formulation, as agreed the previous year.
           731. With regard to subprogramme 1, Policy and analysis, a delegation highlighted
           the importance of continued evidence-based assessment of humanitarian needs. The
           delegation expressed its concern that, in the current digital age, where misinformation
           was widespread, some humanitarian crises could be downgraded by the constant
           rampaging of propaganda aimed at concealing the scale or even the existence of
           humanitarian needs.
           732. Another delegation sought clarification on which mandate formed the basis of
           the use of the term “humanitarian diplomacy” reflected in result 1: consolidated
           analysis for more focused evidence-based policy discussions and analysis. The
           delegation expressed the view that the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian

23-12163                                                                                               117/160
A/78/16

           Affairs seemed to only plan for the flagship initiative of the Under-Secretary-General
           for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency Relief Coordinator, which, in its view, was
           not an ambitious objective for 2024, considering other existing contexts. The
           delegation expressed its concern that there were neither concrete objectives
           mentioned for the whole initiative nor key performance indicators nor an evaluation
           model, and clarification was sought on the views of the Office on these issues.
           733. With regard to result 2: strengthened humanitarian assistance to address the
           growing impacts of the crisis of climate change, a delegation welcomed the efforts
           undertaken by the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs to improve its
           policy analysis activity in the face of increasing challenges, in particular the impact
           of climate change. Another delegation expressed the view that the Office seemed to
           only focus on four countries, presented in table 27.4, and enquired as to whether the
           four countries were the countries of the Emergency Relief Coordinator’s Flagship
           Initiative, namely, Colombia, the Niger, the Philippines and South Sudan.
           Furthermore, with regard to the 2023 performance measure “road map for adapting
           humanitarian assistance to climate change developed by various stakeholders”,
           delegations enquired about the status of the road map and whether it would be
           publicly accessible.
           734. A delegation made reference to result 3: collective solutions for the protection
           of the humanitarian operating environment against emerging risks, and noted that the
           approach emanated from the Global Humanitarian Policy Forum. While it
           acknowledged the need for the approach, the delegation emphasi zed that the Forum
           only provided a summary report, which should not serve as the source of programme
           mandates. The delegation sought clarification on why the Forum was presented in the
           programme plan and stressed that the references and terms included in the programme
           plan should arise from intergovernmental mandates.
           735. Support was expressed for the use of new technologies on the grounds that was
           presented under result 3: collective solutions for the protection of the humanitarian
           operating environment against emerging risks, and paragraph 27.28. A delegation
           enquired as to whether the Office could organize regular thematic briefings on
           successes and challenges in that area. Another delegation stressed the importance of
           finding a balance between the use of new technology and the importance of physical
           presence in the field while ensuring the protection of data, and further clarification was
           sought on that aspect of data protection. Clarification was sought on how the Office for
           the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs had planned its research and analysis on the
           safe use of ICT and how it would utilize and build on existing findings and mechanisms
           within the United Nations system, for example, the Office of Information and
           Communications Technology. The delegation further enquired about how the work of
           the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs would adhere to and deal with
           the trend of using ICT in an effective way in the long term.
           736. With regard to subprogramme 2, Coordination of humanitarian action and
           emergency response, a delegation expressed its strong view of the need to
           operationalize both the new mandates and the established mandates to create a more
           coherent nexus between development, peace and humanitarian assistance. The
           delegation further noted that the humanitarian mandates for development and peace
           were an integral part of security and the New Agenda for Peace, and reiterated that
           that nexus would make the policies more innovative and effective. Another delegation
           highlighted the importance of the subprogramme and opined that the increased use of
           anticipatory approaches and early warning systems could assist in preventing massive
           loss of life while at the same time allowing more funds to be allocated to other
           humanitarian hotspots.



 118/160                                                                                                23-12163
                                                                                                        A/78/16

           737. With regard to figures 27.I and 27.II, a delegation welcomed the positive results
           presented and commended the role of the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
           Affairs in the coordination of humanitarian action and emergency response.
           738. With regard to result 1: strengthened humanitarian response planning, a
           delegation expressed the view that, on the basis of its experience, it was difficult to
           implement Joint Intersectoral Analysis Framework 1.0 in the humanitarian context
           due to high complexity and intensive needs of human resources. In that regard, the
           delegation noted that several Member States had raised concerns on whether there
           were enough capacities to implement Joint Intersectoral Analysis Framework 2.0. The
           delegation further expressed its view that the target rate of 100 per cent
           implementation planned for 2023 and 2024 seemed unrealistic and asked the Office
           for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs for its views.
           739. With regard to result 2: increased use of anticipatory approaches and early
           warning early action systems, and the performance measure for 2023 reflected in
           table 27.8, a delegation shared its understanding that the pilot phase would end in
           December 2022 and that it would be mainstreamed into the context of the Central
           Emergency Response Fund programme from 2023 onward. The delegation sought
           clarification on an update regarding the vision of the Office for the Coordination of
           Humanitarian Affairs for anticipatory action after the pilot phase. With regard to the
           performance measure for 2024, a delegation sought clarification on whether the target
           of 10 per cent of the Fund would be used for anticipatory action and, if that were the
           case, whether that should also be mentioned in that result as a deliverable. The Office’s
           role in promoting early warning systems in mitigating disasters was also emphasized.
           740. With regard to result 3: transforming humanitarian programming to improve the
           delivery of aid to people in need, and the performance measure for 2024 reflected in
           table 27.9, a delegation questioned whether the performance measure of 75 per cent of
           humanitarian country operations report simplified, shorter humanitarian programme
           cycle processes and improved ability to focus on delivery of humanitarian assistance
           was realistic, taking into consideration the Joint Intersectoral Analysis Framework.
           741. With regard to subprogramme 3, Emergency support services, a delegation
           highlighted the significance of the unimpeded access of the Office for the
           Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs and other humanitarian actors to any area
           where humanitarian response was required. The delegation further expressed its regret
           that delivery of vital support to women, children and older persons in need of
           humanitarian aid could be hindered owing to political considerations.
           742. With regard to subprogramme 4, Humanitarian emergency information and
           advocacy, a delegation expressed appreciation for the continued advocacy efforts
           undertaken by the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs to raise
           awareness of humanitarian principles and the need for an adequate response to any
           humanitarian situation, considering that armed conflicts, threats to food security and
           many other drivers of humanitarian crises remained in place.
           743. Another delegation acknowledged the programme performance reported in 2022
           and the accomplishments of the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs,
           including its development and use of the Horn of Africa drought data explorer, which
           brought together critical information on many interconnected issues, such as food
           insecurity, rainfall levels and conflict, and facilitated the tracking of developments by
           humanitarians towards better-informed decision-making. The delegation noted that
           the data explorer had helped to raise awareness of the needs of people affected by
           drought, as well as of acute food insecurity in the region, operational priority areas
           and the required funding.



23-12163                                                                                               119/160
A/78/16

           744. With regard to the United Nations Office for Disaster Risk Reduction,
           delegations welcomed the strategy and results presented by that Office, which
           emphasized the importance of the Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction
           2015–2030 and improved understanding of and the prevention of disasters.
           745. With regard to result 1: scale up resilience at the local level through global
           partnership, and paragraph 27.122, a delegation sought clarification on the initiative
           “Making Cities Resilient 2030” and the innovative outreach model that had been
           adopted, which in its view seemed successful. The delegation sought further
           clarification on whether the model would be taken into consideration for the planned
           results for 2024.
           746. A delegation expressed the view that the staffing composition of the Office for
           the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs and the United Nations Office for Disaster
           Risk Reduction should be made more inclusive and diverse. The same delegation
           expressed its hope that both offices would take measures to improve geographical
           representation by recruiting more staff from underrepresented developing countries.
           747. While matters relating to parts of the programme dealing with resources were
           not within the mandate of the Committee, a delegation emphasized that the regular
           budget was funded by Member States and, as such, its resources should be utilized
           only for the implementation of the decisions agreed upon by Member States, as
           reflected in the documents of the General Assembly and the Economic and Social
           Council.

           Conclusions and recommendations
           748. The Committee commended the work carried out by the Office for the
           Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs in the face of increasing humanitarian
           needs and interlocking global challenges.
           749. The Committee recommended that the General Assembly request the
           Secretary-General, in his capacity as Chair of CEB, to work towards further
           consolidating United Nations system mechanisms and capacities for ensuring the
           facilitation of the safe and unhindered humanitarian access of United Nations
           agencies to respond to the needs of affected people in situations of armed conflict
           and humanitarian emergencies, in full respect of the principles of humanity,
           neutrality, impartiality and independence.
           750. The Committee recommended that the General Assembly request the Office
           for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs to continue to pursue efforts to
           strengthen partnerships at the global level with the International Red Cross and
           Red Crescent Movement, relevant humanitarian NGOs and other relevant
           stakeholders to ensure the effectiveness of humanitarian response.
           751. The Committee appreciated the efforts of the Office for the Coordination
           of Humanitarian Affairs and recommended that the General Assembly
           encourage the Office to continue to ensure the timely, coherent, coordinated and
           principled response of the international community to natural disasters and
           complex emergencies and to facilitate the transition from emergency relief to
           rehabilitation and sustainable development.
           752. The Committee underlined the importance of better integrating disaster
           risk reduction into humanitarian response and also highlighted the critical role
           of the United Nations Office for Disaster Risk Reduction in continuing to
           strengthen its coordination within the United Nations system, including its
           support to United Nations country teams and resident coordinators in
           integrating disaster risk reduction and resilience into common country analyses
           and the United Nations Sustainable Development Cooperation Framework.

 120/160                                                                                            23-12163
                                                                                             A/78/16

           753. The Committee also underlined the importance of anticipatory approaches
           and early warning early action systems, and the need to improve them in the
           humanitarian system, and of scaling up resilience in cooperation and
           collaboration with national Governments and relevant authorities, as well as
           regional and subregional organizations, as appropriate.
           754. The Committee recommended that the General Assembly approve the
           programme narrative of programme 23, Humanitarian assistance, of the
           proposed programme budget for 2024, subject to the following modifications:

           I.   Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
                Overall orientation
                Paragraph 27.3
                     Replace “early action and anticipatory approaches”              with
                “anticipatory approaches and early warning early action systems”.
                     Replace “early action and a prompt” with “timely and effective”.

                Paragraph 27.6 (a)
                     Replace “other disasters” with “other factors”.

                Paragraph 27.6 (c)
                     Before “disasters” delete “other”.
                     Replace “, including armed conflicts,” with “and armed conflicts”.
                     After “conflicts” insert “and humanitarian crises”.

                Paragraph 27.7
                      Delete “For example, the Office promotes gender equality and the
                empowerment of women and girls through its action plans, inter-agency
                policies and tools, and its senior advisers were deployed in support of
                humanitarian coordinators and humanitarian countr y teams.”.

                Paragraph 27.9
                     Replace “In line with” with “Noting”.
                     Delete “, in line with the Charter on Inclusion of Persons with
                Disabilities in Humanitarian Action”.
                     Delete “and rights”.

                Paragraph 27.11
                     Delete “For example, the 2022 Global Humanitarian Policy Forum
                was conducted virtually, which enabled the engagement of approximately
                6,000 participants from across all regions”.

                Subprogramme 1
                Policy and analysis
                Paragraph 27.23
                     Before “access” insert “humanitarian”.
                     Delete “and humanitarian diplomacy”.



23-12163                                                                                    121/160
A/78/16

                Delete “, which met the planned target, with more than 6,000
           participants from 145 countries (75 per cent from the global South) in the
           Forum in 2022, representing a 200 per cent increase in participation
           compared with 2021”.

           Table 27.4
           Column “2022 (actual)”
                  Delete “ for example, the call by the Inter-Agency Standing Committee
           for”

           Column “2024 (planned)”
                  After “adverse” insert “ effects of”.
                  Replace “events” with “change”.
                In the title of result 3, replace “collective solutions fo r the protection
           of the humanitarian operating environment against emerging risks” with
           “addressing emerging risks on the humanitarian operating environment”.

           Paragraph 27.28
                  After “principles of” insert “humanity,”.

           Subprogramme 2
           Coordination of humanitarian action and emergency response
           Paragraph 27.34
                Replace “by a mixture of conflict” with “by a mixture of armed
           conflicts, natural disasters”.
                  Replace “climate shocks” with “adverse impacts of climate change”.
                  Delete “health”.
                  Replace “time-sensitive” with “timely”.

           Table 27.8
           Column “2023 (planned)”
                Replace “climate-related natural disasters” with “disasters related to
           climate change”.

           Paragraph 27.40
                  Replace the existing text with the following:
                “The humanitarian programme cycle consists of a set of interlinked
           tools to assist the Resident and Humanitarian Coordinator and the
           humanitarian country team to improve humanitarian assistance and
           protection. The implementation of the cycle is increasingly challenged by
           the growing humanitarian needs, complex operating environments,
           evolving global expectations and mismatch between capacities and
           resources. There is a need to balance rigorous needs and response analysis
           with contextual flexibility. The subprogramme has been examining the ways
           in which coordination mechanisms can continue to be improved.”.




 122/160                                                                                      23-12163
                                                                                             A/78/16


                 Paragraph 27.41
                      Delete “improved prioritization within”.
                      After “targeting of beneficiaries” insert “based on need”.

                 Table 27.9
                 Column “2022 (actual)”
                      Delete “cycle facilitation package for 2023,”.

                 Subprogramme 3
                 Emergency support services
                 Paragraph 27.53
                      Replace “timely access” with “safe and unimpeded humanitarian
                 access”.

                 Paragraph 27.54
                      After “involved in” insert “armed”.
                     Replace “by enhancing the use of humanitarian negotiations and
                 humanitarian diplomacy” with “in order to establish and maintain
                 humanitarian access and, in so doing, fulfil humanitarian needs.”.
                      After “unimpeded” insert “humanitarian”.
                      After “older persons and ethnic and religious minorities” insert “,
                 within the mandate of the Office”.

                 Table 27.11
                      In item 3, replace “environmental emergency response” with
                 “emergency response to disasters, natural hazards and adverse effects of
                 climate change”.

                 Paragraph 27.59 (a)
                      Delete “unimpeded and”.

                 Table 27.12
                 Column “2022 (actual)”
                      Replace “on the frontline of the response” with “in the closest
                 proximity to those in need”.

           II.   United Nations Office for Disaster Risk Reduction
                 Programme of work
                 Paragraph 27.112
                      After “taking into account climate change” delete “risk”.

                 Paragraph 27.114
                      Replace “ In line with” with “Noting”.




23-12163                                                                                    123/160
A/78/16


                Paragraph 27.116
                      Replace “The Bali Agenda for Resilience, the summary of the seventh
                session’s proceedings,” with “and”.

                Paragraph 27.126
                     Replace “Climate and disaster risk analytics” with “Climate change
                and disaster risk analytics”.
