[Extract: chapter on Programme 23, Humanitarian assistance, from A/79/16 (Report of the Committee for Programme and Coordination). Lines 5810-5975 of the full pdftotext -layout output; the rest of the report is not reproduced.]

           Programme 23
           Humanitarian assistance

           594. At its 16th meeting, on 24 May 2024, the Committee considered programme 23,
           Humanitarian assistance, of the proposed programme plan for 2025 and programme
           performance in 2023 (A/79/6 (Sect. 27)).

           Discussion
           595. Delegations expressed appreciation and support for the work of the Office for
           the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs and the United Nations Office for Disaster
           Risk Reduction. Delegations also expressed their appreciation for the presentation of
           a comprehensive programme plan for 2025, with a delegation noting that its
           comments from the previous year had been taken into account in the current plan. The
           delegation indicated its intention to submit written amendments to the plan to reflect
           the final decisions of the twenty-eighth session of the Conference of the Parties to the
           United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change and the functioning of the
           International Search and Rescue Advisory Group.
           596. A delegation expressed the view that the Office for the Coordination of
           Humanitarian Affairs and the United Nations Office for Disaster Risk Reduction were
           indispensable for the coordination of principled action to ensure coherent, effective
           and consistent system-wide response strategies to meet the needs of affected people
           and strengthen resilience and adaptation, while minimizing duplication in addressing
           gaps in response efforts. Another delegation welcomed the critical leadership role
           performed by both Offices in response to humanitarian emergencies a nd expressed
           the view that cohesive and efficient collaboration was essential to deliver a
           humanitarian response in complex environments. Delegations emphasized the need to
           strengthen the interlinkages between humanitarian development, peacebuilding and
           humanitarian needs.
           597. A delegation expressed its broad support for the overall proposed strategy and
           planned results for 2025 outlined in the report, including the need to utilize a
           comprehensive, authoritative and evidence-based assessment of global needs and
           challenges, and the need for an agile, adaptive humanitarian system. Another
           delegation expressed the view that ensuring well-coordinated and principled
           humanitarian assistance by the international community remained as important as
           ever. The same delegation emphasized the critical role played by the Office for the
           Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs in coordinating response efforts by the
           international community to ensure that humanitarian assistance was delivered in a
           timely, coherent, coordinated and principled manner, as well as to facilitate the
           transition from emergency relief to rehabilitation and sustainable development.


 108/140                                                                                              24-10675
                                                                                                        A/79/16

           598. A delegation expressed its appreciation for the active role played by the Office
           for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs in organizing funding appeals,
           organizing and coordinating humanitarian assistance, ensuring rapid response to
           emergency humanitarian crises and providing support for the resolution of protracted
           crises. The delegation acknowledged the efforts of the United Nations to increase the
           efficiency of humanitarian assistance and improve the humanitarian funding
           mechanism. Another delegation acknowledged the performance and accomplishments
           of the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs in 2023. The delegation
           cited as an example the organization of responses through 27 country-specific and
           9 regional plans, which had enabled it to reach 128 million people with some form of
           assistance, as noted in paragraph 27.31 of the report. The same delegation noted with
           concern the continued gap between humanitarian needs and resources for the Office,
           and welcomed efforts to broaden the donor base, including through engagement with
           the private sector.
           599. A delegation underscored the importance of the full and unconditional
           implementation of the Geneva Conventions and their Additional Protocols by Member
           States and emphasized its support for the safe and unimpeded humanitarian access of
           United Nations agencies to areas affected by conflict and humanitarian crises, in line
           with the humanitarian principles. The same delegation highlighted the increased
           pressure on humanitarian actors as a result of deepening global insecurity and the
           growing number of humanitarian emergencies. In that context, the delegation
           emphasized the importance of impartiality, neutrality, independence and the
           non-politicization of United Nations agencies. A delegation said that the United
           Nations had not been able to reach some affected populations during the previous year
           due to the deliberate obstruction of humanitarian access and opined that a United
           Nations agency or individuals acting on its behalf were being instrumenta lized in
           situations of armed conflict. In that regard, the delegation raised serious concerns
           about the ability of the United Nations to assess the humanitarian situation on the
           ground objectively and accurately and highlighted the urgent need to enhance
           accountability and scrutiny across the humanitarian domain. The delegation expressed
           the view that the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs should
           undertake measures to ensure independent and accurate monitoring and proper
           assessment of the humanitarian situation in conflict areas.
           600. A delegation welcomed the role of the Office for the Coordination of
           Humanitarian Affairs in driving initiatives to strengthen data gathering and
           distribution with a view to enhancing crisis response. The deleg ation expressed the
           view that a methodologically sound evidence base better informed strategic decisions
           on capacity deployment, response times and resource availability. In that regard, the
           delegation asked about the benefits accrued from focusing on an evidence-based
           approach; how the priorities of the Office had evolved in the face of the increased
           number of humanitarian crises globally and continued resource challenges; and what
           critical priorities the Office could not address due to those pressures and constraints.
           The same delegation welcomed the considered approach to anticipatory and early
           action efforts to prevent humanitarian crises, as well as resilience -building efforts to
           meaningfully empower and engage local actions and communities in recovery.
           601. A delegation sought clarification regarding the coordination efforts of the Office
           for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs concerning humanitarian workers and
           asked whether the Office collaborated with the Department of Safety and Security on
           safety and security matters.
           602. Appreciation was expressed for the references made to the integration of a
           gender perspective into the operational activities of the Office for the Coordination
           of Humanitarian Affairs, and the importance of women’s particip ation in decision-
           making processes and the elaboration of public policies.

24-10675                                                                                               109/140
A/79/16

           603. A delegation welcomed the references in the report to collaboration between
           humanitarian and development efforts (paras. 27.1 and 27.13). The delegation
           emphasized that economic growth and sustainable development were crucial for
           prevention and preparedness against natural disasters and other emergencies.
           604. With regard to paragraph 27.2 of the report, a delegation noted the reference to
           the number of people that had experienced food insecurity in 2023 and sought
           clarification on the source of the data used. The delegation stated that relevant United
           Nations system organizations, in particular the Food and Agriculture Organization of
           the United Nations, had not published such data or made corresponding conclusions
           recently. The same delegation acknowledged the increase since 2015 in the number
           of people experiencing food insecurity, but said that the report should cite other key
           factors that affected global food security, in add ition to armed conflicts and climate
           change.
           605. With regard to subprogramme 2, Coordination of humanitarian action and
           emergency response, a delegation expressed support for the proposal of the Office for
           the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs to significantly increase cooperation with
           local communities and organizations. The delegation observed, however, that it was
           proposed that local actors would lead humanitarian responses (para. 27.38). The
           delegation sought clarification regarding the formulation of the paragraph and
           expressed the view that leadership functions belonged to humanitarian organizations,
           which should coordinate their activities with local authorities and national
           Governments.
           606. A delegation requested information on the coordination between the Office for
           the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs and the European Union, in particular the
           Directorate-General for European Civil Protection and Humanitarian Aid Operations.
           The same delegation referred to figure 27.II of the report, under result 3 (increased
           participation of local and national actors in humanitarian coordination mechanisms),
           and sought clarification regarding the number of countries listed.
           607. With regard to subprogramme 3, Emergency support services, a delegation
           referred to paragraphs 27.42, 27.43 and 27.52–27.54 of the report and noted that the
           Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs planned to enhance cooperation
           with the private sector. The delegation acknowledged the need for such cooperation
           but said that it was important to consider the profit-oriented nature of private
           businesses. The delegation expressed the view that working with the private sector in
           the humanitarian field should be based primarily on social responsibility and the
           humanitarian imperative, as well as the humanitarian principles of assistance outlined
           in General Assembly resolution 46/182.
           608. With regard to the United Nations Office for Disaster Risk Reduction, a
           delegation expressed support for the alignment of efforts across the United Nations
           system, including scaling up disaster risk reduction to he lp communities to plan and
           respond to disasters. The delegation recognized and expressed support for the vital
           role of local humanitarian actors in providing aid and assistance.
           609. A delegation expressed appreciation for the important role performed by t he
           United Nations Office for Disaster Risk Reduction in building disaster reduction
           platforms at the global, regional and national levels, as well as in promoting
           international cooperation in disaster reduction.
           610. With regard to paragraphs 27.96 and 27.98 of the report, a delegation observed
           the absence of agreed language with respect to references to countries in special
           situations and sought clarification as to why the report did not use language that was
           in line with the Sendai Framework and other agreed documents.



 110/140                                                                                              24-10675
                                                                                                     A/79/16

           Conclusions and recommendations
           611. The Committee recommended that the plenary or the relevant Main
           Committee or Main Committees of the General Assembly, in line with Assembly
           resolution 78/244, consider the programme plan for programme 23,
           Humanitarian assistance, of the proposed programme budget for 2025 under the
           agenda item entitled “Programme planning” at the seventy-ninth session of the
           Assembly.
