ECOSOC Resolution 2002/32

         Strengthening of the coordination of emergency
         humanitarian assistance of the United Nations

                The Economic and Social Council,
              Reaffirming General Assembly resolution 46/182 of 19 December
         1991, and recalling that humanitarian assistance should be provided in
         accordance with and with due respect for the guiding principles
         contained in the annex to that resolution, and also recalling other
         relevant Assembly resolutions,
              Recalling its agreed conclusions 1998/1 of 17 July 19981 and
         1999/1 of 23 July 1999,2
               Emphasizing the importance of the discussion of humanitarian
         policies and activities in the Economic and Social Council,
              Reaffirming the need for the Council to continue to consider ways
         to enhance further the humanitarian affairs segment of future
         substantive sessions of the Council,
              Welcoming the fact that the 2002 humanitarian affairs segment
         considered the theme “Strengthening of the coordination of United
         Nations humanitarian assistance in cases of natural disasters and
         complex humanitarian emergencies, with particular attention to
         reaching the vulnerable and the transition from relief to development”,
              Deeply concerned about alleged sexual abuse, exploitation and
         misuse of humanitarian assistance by personnel involved in
         humanitarian assistance activities and stressing the need for appropriate
         measures in this regard,
               Encouraging the direct participation of local communities and
         populations in the identification and implementation of humanitarian
         and transitional programmes, with a view to supporting overall peace-
         building, reconciliation, reconstruction and development efforts,
               Stressing the need to address the funding and strategic planning
         gap between relief and development activities in the context of natural
         disasters and complex emergencies,
              Emphasizing the importance of international cooperation in
         support of the efforts of affected States in dealing with natural disasters
         and complex emergencies in all their phases,
              Recognizing that special attention should be given to women as
         well as the most vulnerable, including children, older persons and
         persons with disabilities, as well as victims of terrorism,
               Welcoming the efforts made by the United Nations system to
         strengthen the consolidated appeals process as a coordination and
         strategic planning tool for the provision of humanitarian assistance and
         transition from relief to development,

        1 See Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-third Session, Supplement No.

         3 (A/53/3 and Corr.1 and Add.1), chap. VII, para. 5.
        2 Ibid., Fifty-fourth Session, Supplement No. 3 (A/54/3/Rev.1), chap. VI, para. 5.
      Noting with concern that, while the consolidated appeals process
 remains one of the most significant mechanisms for humanitarian
 resource mobilization, it has suffered consistent shortfalls and, in this
 regard, encouraging the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
 Affairs of the Secretariat to continue to examine in greater depth the
 reasons for and implications of this,
      Taking note of the assessment by the Secretary-General regarding
 criminal activities in the context of complex emergencies in pursuit of
 economic gain including, inter alia, illicit use by armed groups of
 natural resources and trafficking of women and children, and expressing
 concern over their impact on humanitarian assistance in such
 emergencies,
       Bearing in mind that reaching the vulnerable is essential for
 providing adequate protection and assistance in contexts of natural
 disasters and complex emergencies as well as for strengthening local
 capacity to cope with humanitarian needs in such contexts,
       Welcoming the Inter-Agency Standing Committee policy statement
 on the integration of a gender perspective in humanitarian affairs and
 stressing the importance of its effective implementation,
       1.   Takes note with appreciation of the report of the Secretary-
 General on strengthening the coordination of emergency humanitarian
 assistance of the United Nations;3
       2.   Invites the Secretary-General to continue to strengthen the
 capacities of and consult with, where appropriate, regional and
 subregional organizations so as to respond to complex humanitarian
 crises and natural disasters and to report to the Economic and Social
 Council on practical steps taken in this regard;
       3.    Welcomes the efforts of the Office for the Coordination of
 Humanitarian Affairs and the United Nations Development Programme
 to strengthen their coordination and regional activities so as to provide
 more effective support to disaster-prone countries and, to this end, calls
 on them, and other relief organizations and institutions to identify
 innovative ways to support those countries in building and, where
 necessary, strengthening local, national and regional capacities in
 disaster prevention, mitigation and management;
      4.    Recalls the efforts of the Emergency Relief Coordinator to
 expand participation in United Nations disaster assessment and
 coordination teams and encourages the further participation of United
 Nations organizations in United Nations disaster assessment
 coordination;
      5.    Stresses the continued need and relevance of integrating a
 gender perspective in the development and implementation of
 humanitarian assistance activities throughout all their phases and in
 prevention and recovery strategies;
       6.   Calls upon United Nations country teams in consultation
 with and in support of Governments to promote contingency planning
 for possible risks related to complex emergencies or natural disasters;

3 A/57/77-E/2002/63.
      7.    Encourages States that have not signed or ratified the
 Tampere Convention on the Provision of Telecommunication Resources
 for Disaster Mitigation and Relief Operations,4 adopted at Tampere,
 Finland, on 18 June 1998, to consider doing so;
       8.    Also encourages humanitarian agencies to engage in the
 further strengthening of humanitarian information centres, by providing
 timely and accurate information on assessed needs, and the activities
 developed to respond to them;
       9.    Calls upon the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
 Affairs as well as the United Nations Development Programme, in
 consultation with Governments and the humanitarian and development
 community, with the support of international financial institutions
 where appropriate, to develop humanitarian strategies to support the
 engagement of local communities and institutions as a means of
 supporting humanitarian assistance activities and the transition from
 relief to development;
      10. Calls upon Governments, when providing guidance to the
 United Nations system, including the agencies, funds and programmes
 through their governing bodies, to articulate areas of responsibility in
 addressing the transition from relief to development;
      11. Calls upon Member States to support the incorporation and
 operationalization of disaster risk management analysis into
 humanitarian assistance activities, poverty eradication and sustainable
 development strategies;
       12. Urges the United Nations system to strengthen and align its
 existing planning tools such as the consolidated appeals process and,
 where they exist, common country assessments and the United Nations
 Development Assistance Frameworks in order to facilitate the transition
 from relief to development and better to reflect disaster risk
 management;
       13. Requests the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
 Affairs, other members of the Inter-Agency Standing Committee,
 affected countries and other partners concerned to ensure that
 consolidated appeals contain adequate plans to align relief and
 transitional programmes, inter alia, in the area of resource mobilization;
       14. Takes note of its decision to consider creating ad hoc
 advisory groups to examine the humanitarian and economic needs of
 African countries emerging from conflict, and encourages relevant parts
 of the United Nations system, including existing coordination structures
 and mechanisms, to cooperate with such ad hoc advisory groups;
       15. Encourages further strengthening of the consolidated appeals
 process as a coordination and strategic planning tool and urges donors
 to contribute to this objective and to address priority needs identified
 through the process, and also urges affected countries to reflect these
 priorities in their national efforts;
      16. Supports the efforts of the Emergency Relief Coordinator to
 engage in a dialogue with other humanitarian actors, including non-

4 United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1586, No. 27688.
governmental organizations, on strengthening their involvement in the
development of common humanitarian action plans and consolidated
appeals, and encourages them to contribute actively to their
implementation;
     17. Calls upon United Nations organizations to continue to
improve needs- assessment methodologies in the consolidated appeals
process and to strengthen efforts to report on results;
     18. Encourages donors to ensure that financing of high-profile
emergencies does not come at the expense of low-profile emergency
appeals, inter alia, by making efforts to increase the overall levels of
humanitarian assistance;
     19. Welcomes the initiative of donors to meet and consider the
global trend in humanitarian response to ensure that imbalances can be
addressed when consolidated appeals are launched;
     20. Encourages the development of a global humanitarian
financial tracking system in order to contribute to improved
coordination and accountability, and requests the Emergency Relief
Coordinator to make proposals, without delay, for a comprehensive
system for the collection and dissemination of data on humanitarian
needs and contributions;
     21. Calls upon all parties to armed conflict to comply with their
obligations under international humanitarian law, human rights law and
refugee law;
      22. Calls upon all Governments and parties in complex
humanitarian emergencies, in particular in armed conflicts and in post-
conflict situations, in countries in which humanitarian personnel are
operating, in conformity with the relevant provisions of international
law and national laws, to cooperate fully with the United Nations and
other humanitarian agencies and organizations and to ensure the safe
and unhindered access of humanitarian personnel in order to allow them
to perform efficiently their task of assisting the affected population,
including refugees and internally displaced persons;
      23. Reaffirms the obligation of Member States to protect
civilians in armed conflict in accordance with international
humanitarian law, and invites them to promote a culture of protection,
taking into account the particular needs of women, children, older
persons and persons with disabilities;
     24. Urges the international community and the United Nations
system to strengthen their humanitarian and other assistance to civilians
under foreign occupation;
     25. Encourages efforts to provide education during and after
humanitarian emergencies in order to contribute to a smooth transition
from relief to development;
      26. Invites Member States and other partners, as appropriate, to
participate actively in workshops on the protection of civilians in order
to impart knowledge and improve practice based on shared experiences;
    27. Encourages Governments, the United Nations system and
humanitarian organizations to share experiences and lessons they may
 have learned with regard to the development of criteria and procedures
 for the identification of armed elements and their separation from the
 civilian population in situations of complex emergencies, and urges
 Governments and relevant United Nations bodies to strengthen
 measures in this regard;
       28. Notes with appreciation the establishment of the non-
 operational inter-agency Unit on Internal Displacement in the Office for
 the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, and encourages Member
 States and relevant agencies to provide it with the necessary resources
 to enable it to carry out its activities;
       29. Notes that an increasing number of States, United Nations
 organizations and regional and non-governmental organizations are
 making use of the Guiding Principles on Internal Displacement,5
 encourages the strengthening of legal frameworks on the protection of
 internally displaced persons and urges the international community to
 strengthen its support to affected States in their efforts to provide,
 through national plans or initiatives, protection and assistance to their
 internally displaced persons;
      30. Strongly urges the United Nations system and all
 humanitarian organizations to adopt and implement appropriate
 measures, including codes of conduct, for all personnel involved in
 humanitarian assistance activities, to review protection and distribution
 mechanisms, and to recommend actions that protect against sexual
 abuse and exploitation and the misuse of humanitarian assistance, and
 requests the Secretary-General to report back to the Council in this
 regard;
      31. Welcomes efforts to strengthen international urban search
 and rescue operations through, inter alia, activities of the International
 Search and Rescue Advisory Group;
       32. Requests the Secretary-General to continue progress on the
 directories referred to in General Assembly resolution 56/103 of 14
 December 2001;
      33. Also requests the Secretary-General to reflect the progress
 made in the implementation of and follow-up to the present resolution
 in his next report to the Council and the General Assembly on the
 coordination of emergency humanitarian assistance of the United
 Nations.

                                                     41st plenary meeting
                                                             26 July 2002




5 E/CN.4/1998/53/Add.2, annex.
