ECOSOC Resolution 2007/3

          Strengthening of the coordination of emergency
          humanitarian assistance of the United Nations

                   The Economic and Social Council ,
                Reaffirming General Assembly resolution 46/182 of 19
          December 1991 and the guiding principles contained in the annex
          thereto, and recalling other relevant resolutions of the General
          Assembly and relevant resolutions and agreed conc lusions of the
          Council,
                Welcoming the decision to consider the theme “Strengthening of
          the coordination of United Nations humanitarian assistance through
          enhancing the effectiveness of needs -based humanitarian assistance”
          at the humanitarian affairs segme nt of its substantive session of 2007,
                Welcoming also its decision to hold panels on the use of military
          assets in natural disaster relief and on needs -based humanitarian
          financing, including the Central Emergency Response Fund,
               Expressing grave concern about the increase in the number of
          people affected and the growing economic losses caused by
          humanitarian emergencies, including natural disasters,
                Recognizing the clear relationship between emergency relief,
          rehabilitation and development, and reaffirmi ng that, in order to
          ensure a smooth transition from relief to rehabilitation and
          development, emergency assistance must be provided in ways that
          will be supportive of recovery and long -term development, and that
          emergency measures should be seen as a step towards long -term
          development,
                1.   Takes note of the report of the Secretary -General on the
          strengthening of the coordination of emergency humanitarian
          assistance of the United Nations; 1
               2.    Also takes note of the reports of the Secretary -General on
          the Central Emergency Response Fund 2 and on strengthening
          emergency relief, rehabilitation, reconstruction and prevention in the
          aftermath of the Indian Ocean tsunami disaster; 3
               3.    Further takes note of the note by the Secretary -General
          transmitting the report of the Joint Inspection Unit, entitled “ Towards
          a United Nations humanitarian assistance programme for disaster
          response and reduction: lessons learned from the Indian Ocean
          tsunami disaster” , 4 and the note by the Secretary -General transmitting
          his comments and those of the United Nations System Chief
          Executives Board for Coordination thereon; 5



        1 A/62/87- E / 2 0 0 7 / 7 0 .

        2 A/62/72- E / 2 0 0 7 / 7 3 .

        3 A/62/83- E / 2 0 0 7 / 6 7 .

        4 A/61/6 99- E / 2 0 0 7 / 8 .

        5 A / 6 1 / 6 9 9 / A d d . 1 -E/2007/8/Add.1
         4.    Encourages national Governments to create an enabling
  environment for the capacity -building of local authorities and local
  and national non -governmental and community-based organizations,
  and also encourages the relevant entities of the United Nations system
  and other relevant institutions and organizations to support national
  authorities in their capacity -building programmes designed to enhance
  the participation and contribution of local authorities and local and
  national non -governmental and community -based organizations,
  including through technical cooperation and long -term partnerships
  based on recognition of their important role in providing humanitarian
  as sistance;
        5.    Stresses that the United Nations system should make
  efforts to enhance existing humanitarian capacities, knowledge and
  institutions, including, as appropriate, through the transfer of
  technology and expertise to developing countries;
       6.   Note s the efforts by the United Nations system to further
  enhance the coordination of its emergency humanitarian assistance;
        7.   Recognizes the importance of involving, as appropriate,
  relevant entities, including non-governmental organizations and
  community -based organizations, that provide humanitarian assistance
  in national and local coordination efforts, and invites those entities to
  participate in the improvement of humanitarian assistance, as
  appropriate;
       8.     Requests the relevant United Nations organizat ions to
  continue to engage systematically with relevant authorities and
  organizations at the regional and national levels to prepare for and
  respond to humanitarian emergencies, and invites Member States to
  support, as appropriate, these efforts;
       9.    Urges Member States to prepare and update disaster
  preparedness plans at all levels and to conduct regular disaster
  preparedness exercises in accordance with priority 5 of the Hyogo
  Framework for Action, 6 as appropriate and taking into account their
  own circums tances and capacities, and encourages the international
  community and relevant United Nations entities, within their
  respective mandates, to support, upon request, national efforts in this
  regard;
       10. Notes the establishment of the Global Platform for Dis aster
  Risk Reduction and the Global Facility for Disaster Reduction and
  Recovery, a partnership of the International Strategy for Disaster
  Reduction system to support the Hyogo Framework for Action;
        11. Invites Member States to work with relevant United
  Nations organizations to strengthen humanitarian standby capacities,
  in particular in the area of disaster relief, including, where
  appropriate, by participating in humanitarian response networks, by
  contributing to and maintaining the standby directories of the Central



6 H y o g o F r a m e w o r k f o r A c t i o n 2 0 0 5 - 2015, Building the Resilience of Nations

  and Communities to Disasters, adopted by the World Conference on Disaster
  Reduction; see A/CONF.206/6 and Corr.1, chap. I, resolutio n 2 .
Register of Disaster Management Capacities and by facilitating
standby arrangements with the private sector;
       12. Requests the Secretary -General to review and report on, in
consultation with Member States, the use of military assets for
disas ter relief, with the aim of improving the predictability and use of
these assets, based on humanitarian principles;
      13. Also requests the Secretary -General to provide an update
on the Inter-Agency Standing Committee review of its 1999 policy
statement on the integration of a gender perspective into humanitarian
assistance and to report on steps taken in this regard;
     14. Stresses the importance of a coordinated process of
assessing lessons learned in the international response to a given
humanitarian emerg ency;
     15. Requests relevant United Nations organizations, in
consultation with Member States, to coordinate and strengthen needs
assessments and improve data on beneficiaries by agreeing on
common definitions, indicators, information management mechanisms
and consistent methodologies for data collection;
      16. Requests the Secretary -General to encourage the relevant
organizations of the United Nations system to continue to identify and
use, as appropriate and available, local resources and expertise from
within the affected country and/or its neighbours in response to
humanitarian needs;
      17. Welcomes the continued efforts to strengthen the
humanitarian response capacity and the progress made in
strengthening support to resident/humanitarian coordinators, in cluding
by improving their identification, selection and training, to provide a
timely, predictable and appropriate response to humanitarian needs
and to strengthen United Nations coordination activities at the field
level, and requests the Secretary -General to continue efforts in this
regard, in consultation with Member States;
      18. Encourages Member States, relevant humanitarian
organizations and non -governmental organizations to provide timely
and accurate information on contributions and the use of humanitarian
funds through the financial tracking service, and requests the Office
for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs of the United Nations
Secretariat to continue to improve the analysis and reporting of
comprehensive financial information through the financial tracking
service;
     19. Invites Member States to make contributions to
humanitarian funding mechanisms, including consolidated and flash
appeals, the Central Emergency Response Fund and other funds,
recognizing the importance of providing humanitarian assistance in a
manner that is flexible, predictable and, where possible, multi-year
and additional, taking note of chronically underfunded emergencies;
      20. Requests the Secretary - General to reflect the progress
made in the implementation of and follow-up to the present resolution
in his next report to the Economic and Social Council and the General
Assembly on the strengthening of the coordination of emergency
humanitarian assistance of the United Nations.

                                            34th plenary meeting
                                                    17 July 2007
