ECOSOC Resolution 2006/5

          Strengthening of the coordination of emergency
          humanitarian assistance of the United Nations

                The Economic and Social Council,
                Reaffirming General Assembly resolution 46/182 of 19 December
          1991 and the guiding principles contained in the annex thereto, and
          recalling other relevant General Assembly and Economic and Social
          Council resolutions and agreed conclusions of the Council,
                Welcoming the fact that at the humanitarian affairs segment of its
          substantive session of 2006, the Economic and Social Council
          considered the theme “Strengthening of the coordination of United
          Nations humanitarian assistance: implementing improved humanitarian
          response at all levels, including strengthening capacity, with particular
          attention to recent humanitarian emergencies including severe natural
          disasters”,
               Welcoming also the fact that the Economic and Social Council
          held panels on gender-based violence in humanitarian emergencies and
          chronically underfunded emergencies,
                Recognizing the clear relationship between emergency,
          rehabilitation, and development and that, in order to ensure a smooth
          transition from relief to rehabilitation and development, emergency
          assistance must be provided in ways that will be supportive of recovery
          and long-term development, and that emergency measures should be
          seen as a step towards long-term development,
               Recalling the Hyogo Declaration1 and the Hyogo Framework for
          Action 2005-2015: Building the Resilience of Nations and Communities
          to Disasters,2 as adopted at the World Conference on Disaster
          Reduction, held in Kobe, Hyogo, Japan, from 18 to 22 January 2005,
                1.     Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General;3
                2.   Also takes note of the reports of the Secretary-General on
          humanitarian assistance and rehabilitation for El Salvador and
          Guatemala,4 on strengthening emergency relief, rehabilitation,
          reconstruction and prevention in the aftermath of the South Asian
          earthquake disaster — Pakistan,5 and on strengthening emergency
          relief, rehabilitation, reconstruction, recovery and prevention in the
          aftermath of the Indian Ocean tsunami disaster;6
               3.    Requests the Secretary-General to encourage the relevant
          organizations of the United Nations system to continue to identify and
          use, as appropriate and available, local resources and expertise from
          within the affected country and/or its neighbours in response to
          humanitarian needs;

        1 A/CONF.206/6 and Corr.1, chap. I, resolution 1.
        2 Ibid., resolution 2.
        3 A/61/85-E/2006/81.
        4 A/61/78-E/2006/61.
        5 A/61/79-E/2006/67.
        6 A/61/87-E/2006/77.
      4.   Encourages Member States to continue their efforts in
preparedness and disaster risk reduction, and encourages the
international community and relevant United Nations entities, within
their respective mandates, to support national efforts in this regard;
      5.   Requests the relevant organizations of the United Nations
system to continue to engage systematically with relevant authorities
and organizations at the regional and national levels to support efforts
to strengthen humanitarian response capacities at all levels, in particular
through preparedness programmes, with a view to improving the overall
adequacy of the deployment of resources;
     6.     Stresses that the United Nations system should make efforts
to enhance existing humanitarian capacities, knowledge and institutions,
including, as appropriate, through the transfer of technology and
expertise to developing countries;
      7.   Emphasizes, in this regard, the importance of strengthening
health sector humanitarian response capacity, and calls upon the
relevant entities of the United Nations and all States to cooperate in this
regard;
      8.   Encourages all States to strengthen their capacity to respond
to natural and man-made disasters, including by establishing or
strengthening national contingency plans and developing or
strengthening, as appropriate, disaster management institutions, also
encourages the sharing of knowledge and experience among States, and
further encourages the international community to support, upon
request, national efforts in this regard;
      9.    Also encourages national Governments to create an enabling
environment for capacity-building of local authorities and local and
national non-governmental and community-based organizations, and
encourages the relevant entities of the United Nations system and other
relevant institutions and organizations to support national authorities in
their capacity-building programmes designed to enhance the
participation and contribution of local authorities and local and national
non-governmental and community-based organizations, including
through technical cooperation, and long-term partnerships based on the
recognition of their important role in providing humanitarian assistance;
      10. Recognizes the importance of involving, as appropriate,
relevant entities, including non-governmental organizations, that
provide humanitarian assistance in national and local coordination
efforts, and invites those entities to participate in the improvement of
humanitarian assistance, as appropriate;
      11. Invites the relevant United Nations humanitarian entities to
continue their efforts to coordinate, as appropriate, with the
International Red Cross and Red Crescent Movement in the provision of
humanitarian assistance;
      12. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to develop more
systematic links with Member States offering military assets for natural
disaster response in order to identify the availability of such assets and
to report to the General Assembly through the Economic and Social
Council in this regard;
       13. Recalls the 2003 “Guidelines on the Use of Military and
 Civil Defence Assets to Support United Nations Humanitarian Activities
 in Complex Emergencies”7 as well as the 1994 “Guidelines on the Use
 of Military and Civil Defence Assets in Disaster Relief”,8 and stresses
 the value of their use and of the development by the United Nations in
 consultation with States and other relevant actors of further guidance on
 civil-military relations in the context of humanitarian activities and
 transition situations;
      14. Reiterates its request to the Secretary-General to report to
 the General Assembly through the Economic and Social Council on
 progress achieved in developing and improving mechanisms for the use
 of emergency standby capacities;
       15. Requests the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
 Affairs of the Secretariat to continue to improve the analysis and
 reporting of comprehensive financial information through its Financial
 Tracking Service, and encourages Member States, multilateral and
 private donors, relevant United Nations humanitarian agencies and non-
 governmental organizations to provide timely and accurate information
 on contributions;
       16 Encourages the relevant United Nations entities to continue
 to provide timely information, through existing channels, on the results
 achieved in the use of funds made available for humanitarian assistance;
       17. Takes note of the efforts by the United Nations system to
 further enhance the coordination of its emergency humanitarian
 assistance;
       18. Welcomes efforts to strengthen the humanitarian response
 capacity of and the support to the United Nations resident/humanitarian
 coordinators and to United Nations country teams, including through
 the provision of necessary training, the identification of resources and
 improving the identification and selection of United Nations
 resident/humanitarian coordinators, to help to provide a timely,
 predictable and appropriate response to humanitarian needs and to
 further improve United Nations coordination activities at the field level,
 and requests the Secretary-General to continue efforts in this regard;
      19. Stresses the importance of a coordinated process of assessing
 lessons learned in the international response to a given humanitarian
 emergency;
      20. Welcomes the establishment of the Central Emergency
 Response Fund, as set out in General Assembly resolution 60/124 of 15
 December 2005, and looks forward to receiving the report to be
 submitted to the General Assembly on the use of the Fund with a view
 to maximizing its impact and improving its functioning;
      21. Encourages the international community to provide
 humanitarian assistance in proportion to needs and on the basis of needs
 assessments, with a view to ensuring a more equitable distribution of
 humanitarian assistance across humanitarian emergencies, including
 those of a protracted nature, as well as fuller coverage of the needs of

7 Available from www.reliefweb.int.
8 Department of Humanitarian Affairs publication, DHA/94/95.
all sectors, and to this end requests United Nations organizations,
including the United Nations country teams, to continue developing,
and improving where appropriate, transparent needs-assessment
mechanisms;
     22. Re-emphasizes that the discussions of humanitarian policies
and activities by the General Assembly and the Economic and Social
Council should be continuously revitalized by Member States with a
view to enhancing their relevance, efficiency and impact;
      23. Recommends that the General Assembly, in order to have a
more focused discussion on humanitarian issues, explore the possibility
at its sixty-first session of reallocating to the plenary of the General
Assembly the sub-items of its agenda related to the strengthening of the
coordination of humanitarian and disaster relief assistance of the United
Nations currently considered by the Second Committee;
     24. Encourages Member States to continue to strengthen
cooperation and coordination between the General Assembly and the
Economic and Social Council on humanitarian issues, based on their
respective mandates and taking into account comparative advantages
and existing complementarities of the two bodies;
      25. Decides to continue to use informal settings, as they exist
within its humanitarian segment, as an opportunity for Member States
to be informed about and exchange views on humanitarian issues;
     26. Requests the Secretary-General to include in his report
lessons learned and best practices in the implementation of the pilot
projects using the cluster approach, in consultation with affected
countries and with the active involvement of relevant United Nations
humanitarian entities;
      27. Also requests the Secretary-General to reflect the progress
made in the implementation of and follow-up to the present resolution
in his next report to the Economic and Social Council and the General
Assembly on the strengthening of the coordination of emergency
humanitarian assistance of the United Nations.
                                                   30th plenary meeting
                                                           18 July 2006
