Policy and Studies Series 2015




REFERENCE
    GUIDE
       Normative developments on the
 coordination of humanitarian assistance
       in the General Assembly and the
            Economic and Social Council
                   since the adoption of
    General Assembly resolution 46/182

    3rd Edition

                                           Office for the
                                           Coordination of
                                           Humanitarian Affairs

                                           Policy Development
                                           and Studies Branch
OCHA Reference Guide | Normative developments on the coordination of humanitarian assistance | 3rd Edition 2015
Policy and Studies Series                          2015




      General Assembly resolution 46/182



REFERENCE GUIDE
           Normative decisions on the
  coordination of humanitarian assistance in the
           General Assembly and the
          Economic and Social Council
              since the adoption of
      General Assembly resolution 46/182

                     3rd Edition
                     April 2015




   OCHA                            Policy Development
                                   and Studies Branch
Table of contents

Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .1
Mode d’Emploi . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .2
A/RES/46/182 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .5
ANNEX . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .6
I.         Guiding Principles . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
      1. Principles and Framework for Humanitarian Assistance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
      2. Humanitarian Access. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
      3. Gender, Vulnerable Groups . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
      4. Protection of Civilians . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 32
      5. Internally Displaced Persons (IDPs) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 35
      6. Safety and Security of Humanitarian Personnel . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 43
      7. Humanitarian Civil-Military Relations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 50

II.        Linkage between Emergency Assistance, Disaster Risk Reduction
           and Transition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 54
      8. Prevention, Preparedness, Disaster Risk Reduction and
         Capacity-Building . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 55
               I.    Prevention, Preparedness, including early warning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .55
              II. Disaster Risk Reduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .64
             III.    Capacity Building . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .73
      9. Transition, Early Recovery, Rehabilitation and Development . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 79

III.       Tools and Mechanisms for Coordination . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 91
 10.        Emergency Relief Coordinator (ERC) and Humanitarian Leadership . . . . . . . . . 92
 11.        Inter-Agency Standing Committee (IASC) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 99
 12.       Humanitarian Financing, including the Central Emergency
           Response Fund (CERF) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 103
 13.        Consolidated Appeals Process (CAP) and Needs Assessment . . . . . . . . . . . . 113
 14.        Humanitarian Field Coordination and Resident/
            Humanitarian Coordinators . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 119
 15.        Information Management . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 125
 16.        Other Mechanisms, including Standby Capacity and
            Emergency Rules and Procedures . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 130

                                                                                            iii | REFERENCE GUIDE / 2015
PREFACE
In 1991, the General Assembly adopted resolution 46/182 and provided the framework for
emergency relief, which continues to guide the work of the humanitarian system today.
46/182 was a comprehensive resolution that broadly addressed how to strengthen the
coordination of the humanitarian system, not least through creating the position of the
Emergency Relief Coordinator, the United Nations department which in 1998 became
the Office of Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, the Inter-Agency Standing Commit-
tee, the Central Emergency Revolving Fund (which in 2005 became the Central Emergency
Response Fund) and the Consolidated Appeals Process.

Since 1991, significant challenges have emerged from the changing environment in which
assistance has been provided. These challenges are evident in a number of areas, such as
those related to internal displacement, gender, access, protection, safety and security of
humanitarian personnel, humanitarian civil-military relation, global challenges and vulner-
ability, among others. Despite some of the complexities of intergovernmental negotiations,
the United Nations’ intergovernmental bodies have made significant progress in address-
ing these new challenges through humanitarian resolutions.

This updated Reference Guide is intended to provide a concise overview of the normative
evolution of the General Assembly and the Economic and Social Council’s key policy deci-
sions pertaining to humanitarian affairs, as seen through humanitarian resolutions since
1991. It should be used as a complement to the Reference Guide – Phase II on Normative
Decisions of Key Governing Bodies of Funds, Programmes and Specialized Agencies of the
United Nations System in Humanitarian Assistance.1




1   The Reference Guide Project has been made possible with the financial support of the Government
    of Switzerland. The Reference Guide and other supporting documents can be accessed at http://
    www.unocha.org/about-us/publications/reference-guides-humanitarian-normative-decisions.

                                                                   1 | REFERENCE GUIDE / 2015
MODE D’EMPLOI
The Reference Guide is intended for use by OCHA staff, particularly those in the field,
so that their work can be better informed by United Nations legislative decisions. The
Reference Guide serves as a tool for their interaction with concerned governments and
other relevant parties in strengthening understanding of and support for a more princi-
pled, accountable and effective humanitarian response. It can also be useful for other
humanitarian practitioners as well as for Member States who are interested in a concise
presentation of United Nations legislative decisions related to humanitarian assistance.

I.     STRUCTURE

The Reference Guide presents the precise language found in United Nations Economic
and Social Council (ECOSOC) and General Assembly (GA) resolutions and decisions.2 The
Guide is organized to follow largely the structure of GA resolution 46/182 and is presented
in 16 thematic categories. The categories are grouped into three sections. The first section
includes issues pertaining to humanitarian principles and the overall framework of assis-
tance; the second section addresses the linkage between humanitarian response, disaster
reduction and transition; and the third section examines humanitarian coordination and
related tools and mechanisms, including humanitarian financing.

Within each category, are sub-categories which reflect the addressees of the operating
paragraphs of resolutions. While it is not possible to always make a clear distinction, these
sub-categories are:

      •     Overarching principles, policies and guidelines

      •     Dispositions addressed to Member States

      •     Dispositions addressed to the United Nations and/or the humanitarian system
            in general

      •     Dispositions addressed to specific actors

Within each sub-category, the resolution paragraphs are presented in chronological order
showcasing the normative evolution over time. Within each paragraph, essential elements
are marked in bold.




2    On the protection of civilians and resolutions by the Security Council in this regard, see the OCHA
     Aide Memoire - For the consideration of issues pertaining to the protection of civilians in armed
     conflict (2014), available at http://www.unocha.org/node/122344.

2    | REFERENCE GUIDE / 2015
II.   REFERENCES USED

While there have been numerous resolutions adopted by the United Nations intergovern-
mental bodies on humanitarian issues since 1946, this Reference Guide focuses on a select
number of relevant resolutions by the GA and ECOSOC on humanitarian coordination and
assistance since GA resolution 48/182 in 1991. Within these, with the exception of some
key passages on humanitarian principles (which draw from both preambular and operative
paragraphs), the Reference Guide only draws from operative paragraphs of the texts. The
Reference Guide focuses on humanitarian coordination resolutions: the GA and ECOSOC
resolutions entitled “Strengthening of the coordination of emergency humanitarian assis-
tance of the United Nations”, as well as the GA resolution “International cooperation on
humanitarian assistance in the field of natural disasters, from relief to development”. For
other resolutions, only the most relevant parts which refer to issues of particular relevance
to coordination and humanitarian principles, have been included. The Reference Guide
does not include intergovernmental decisions adopted for specific humanitarian emergen-
cies and disasters.

The Guide uses a short form of the title of each referenced resolution as follows:

      •   Strengthening Coordination for the GA’s “Strengthening of the coordination
          of emergency humanitarian assistance of the United Nations”

      •   ECOSOC Strengthening Coordination for ECOSOC’s “Strengthening of the
          coordination of emergency humanitarian assistance of the United Nations”

      •   Cooperation in Natural Disasters for “International cooperation on humani-
          tarian assistance in the field of natural disasters, from relief to development”

      •   Safety and Security for “Safety and security of humanitarian personnel and
          protection of United Nations personnel”

      •   Protection of and Assistance to IDPs for “Protection of and assistance to
          internally displaced persons”

      •   NIHO for “ New International Humanitarian Order”

      •   Military and Civil Defence Assets for “Improving the effectiveness and coor-
          dination of military and civil defence assets for natural disaster response”

      •   INSARAG for “Strengthening the effectiveness and coordination of interna-
          tional urban search and rescue assistance”




                                                               3 | REFERENCE GUIDE / 2015
For this guide, resolutions are referenced with symbols as follows:3

     •    General Assembly resolutions:
          ˚ General Assembly / resolution / session number / document number,
            paragraph (year)
            e.g. A / RES / 46 / 182, op1 (1991)

     •    ECOSOC resolutions:
          ˚ ECOSOC / year / decision or resolution number, paragraph
            e.g. E / 2010 / 1, op1

It should be noted that all legislative decisions taken in ECOSOC and the GA are equally
binding on the United Nations Secretariat, and those UN funds and programmes which are
accountable to these principal organs. The resolutions are recommendatory on Member
States. It has been common practice for Member States to adopt resolutions on humanitar-
ian issues by consensus, giving the texts more prominence and weight.




3   For official guidance see “United Nations Document Series Symbols 1946-1996” (ST/LIB/SER.B/5/
    Rev.5).

4   | REFERENCE GUIDE / 2015
A/RES/46/182

STRENGTHENING OF THE COORDINATION OF HUMANITARIAN EMERGENCY
ASSISTANCE OF THE UNITED NATIONS


      The General Assembly,

           Recalling its resolution 2816 (XXVI) of 14 December 1971 and its
      subsequent resolutions and decisions on humanitarian assistance,
      including its resolution 45/100 of 14 December 1990,

           Recalling also its resolution 44/236 of 22 December 1989, the annex
      to which contains the International Framework of Action for the Interna-
      tional Decade for Natural Disaster Reduction,

          Deeply concerned about the suffering of the victims of disasters and
      emergency situations, the loss in human lives, the flow of refugees, the
      mass displacement of people and the material destruction,

           Mindful of the need to strengthen further and make more effective
      the collective efforts of the international community, in particular the
      United Nations system, in providing humanitarian assistance,

           Taking note with satisfaction of the report of the Secretary-General
      on the review of the capacity, experience and coordination arrangements
      in the United Nations system for humanitarian assistance,

            1. Adopts the text contained in the annex to the present resolu-
      tion for the strengthening of the coordination of emergency humanitarian
      assistance of the United Nations system;

           2. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the General Assem-
      bly at its forty-seventh session on the implementation of the present
      resolution.




                                                          5 | REFERENCE GUIDE / 2015
ANNEX

I.     GUIDING PRINCIPLES

1. Humanitarian assistance is of cardinal importance for the victims of natural disasters
and other emergencies.

2. Humanitarian assistance must be provided in accordance with the principles of
humanity, neutrality and impartiality.

3. The sovereignty, territorial integrity and national unity of States must be fully
respected in accordance with the Charter of the United Nations. In this context, humanitar-
ian assistance should be provided with the consent of the affected country and in principle
on the basis of an appeal by the affected country.

4. Each State has the responsibility first and foremost to take care of the victims of
natural disasters and other emergencies occurring on its territory. Hence, the affected
State has the primary role in the initiation, organization, coordination, and implementation
of humanitarian assistance within its territory.

5. The magnitude and duration of many emergencies may be beyond the response
capacity of many affected countries. International cooperation to address emergency
situations and to strengthen the response capacity of affected countries is thus of great
importance. Such cooperation should be provided in accordance with international law and
national laws. Intergovernmental and non- governmental organizations working impartially
and with strictly humanitarian motives should continue to make a significant contribution
in supplementing national efforts.

6. States whose populations are in need of humanitarian assistance are called upon to
facilitate the work of these organizations in implementing humanitarian assistance, in par-
ticular the supply of food, medicines, shelter and health care, for which access to victims
is essential.

7. States in proximity to emergencies are urged to participate closely with the affected
countries in international efforts, with a view to facilitating, to the extent possible, the
transit of humanitarian assistance.

8. Special attention should be given to disaster prevention and preparedness by the
Governments concerned, as well as by the international community.

9. There is a clear relationship between emergency, rehabilitation and development. In
order to ensure a smooth transition from relief to rehabilitation and development, emer-
gency assistance should be provided in ways that will be supportive of recovery and long-
term development. Thus, emergency measures should be seen as a step towards long-term
development.


6    | REFERENCE GUIDE / 2015
10. Economic growth and sustainable development are essential for prevention of and
preparedness against natural disasters and other emergencies. Many emergencies reflect
the underlying crisis in development facing developing countries. Humanitarian assistance
should therefore be accompanied by a renewal of commitment to economic growth and
sustainable development of developing countries. In this context, adequate resources must
be made available to address their development problems.

11. Contributions for humanitarian assistance should be provided in a way which is not to
the detriment of resources made available for international cooperation for development.

12. The United Nations has a central and unique role to play in providing leadership and
coordinating the efforts of the international community to support the affected countries.
The United Nations should ensure the prompt and smooth delivery of relief assistance
in full respect of the above-mentioned principles, bearing in mind also relevant General
Assembly resolutions, including resolutions 2816 (XXVI) of 14 December 1971 and 45/100
of 14 December 1990. The United Nations system needs to be adapted and strengthened
to meet present and future challenges in an effective and coherent manner. It should be
provided with resources commensurate with future requirements. The inadequacy of such
resources has been one of the major constraints in the effective response of the United
Nations to emergencies.

II.   PREVENTION

13. The international community should adequately assist developing countries in
strengthening their capacity in disaster prevention and mitigation, both at the national and
regional levels, for example, in establishing and enhancing integrated programmes in this
regard.

14. In order to reduce the impact of disasters there should be increased awareness of
the need for establishing disaster mitigation strategies, particularly in disaster-prone coun-
tries. There should be greater exchange and dissemination of existing and new technical
information related to the assessment, prediction and mitigation of disasters. As called for
in the International Decade for Natural Disaster Reduction, efforts should be intensified to
develop measures for prevention and mitigation of natural disasters and similar emergen-
cies through programmes of technical assistance and modalities for favourable access to,
and transfer of, relevant technology.

15. The disaster management training programme recently initiated by the Office of
the United Nations Disaster Relief Coordinator and the United Nations Development Pro-
gramme should be strengthened and broadened.

16. Organizations of the United Nations system involved in the funding and the provision
of assistance relevant to the prevention of emergencies should be provided with sufficient
and readily available resources.


                                                                7 | REFERENCE GUIDE / 2015
17. The international community is urged to provide the necessary support and resources
to programmes and activities undertaken to further the goals and objectives of the Decade.

III. PREPAREDNESS
18. International relief assistance should supplement national efforts to improve the
capacities of developing countries to mitigate the effects of natural disasters expeditiously
and effectively and to cope efficiently with all emergencies. The United Nations should
enhance its efforts to assist developing countries to strengthen their capacity to respond
to disasters, at the national and regional levels, as appropriate.

Early warning

19. On the basis of existing mandates and drawing upon monitoring arrangements avail-
able within the system, the United Nations should intensify efforts, building upon the
existing capacities of relevant organizations and entities of the United Nations, for the
systematic pooling, analysis and dissemination of early-warning information on natural
disasters and other emergencies. In this context, the United Nations should consider mak-
ing use as appropriate of the early-warning capacities of Governments and intergovern-
mental and non-governmental organizations.

20. Early-warning information should be made available in an unrestricted and timely
manner to all interested Governments and concerned authorities, in particular of affected
or disaster-prone countries. The capacity of disaster-prone countries to receive, use and
disseminate this information should be strengthened. In this connection, the international
community is urged to assist these countries upon request with the establishment and
enhancement of national early-warning systems.

IV. STAND-BY CAPACITY

(a) Contingency funding arrangements

21. Organizations and entities of the United Nations system should continue to respond
to requests for emergency assistance within their respective mandates. Reserve and other
contingency funding arrangements of these organizations and entities should be examined
by their respective governing bodies to strengthen further their operational capacities for
rapid and coordinated response to emergencies.

22. In addition, there is a need for a complementary central funding mechanism to ensure
the provision of adequate resources for use in the initial phase of emergencies that require
a system-wide response.

23. To that end, the Secretary-General should establish under his authority a central
emergency revolving fund as a cash-flow mechanism to ensure the rapid and coordinated
response of the organizations of the system.

8   | REFERENCE GUIDE / 2015
24. This fund should be put into operation with an amount of 50 million United States dol-
lars. The fund should be financed by voluntary contributions. Consultations among potential
donors should be held to this end. To achieve this target, the Secretary-General should launch
an appeal to potential donors and convene a meeting of those donors in the first quarter of
1992 to secure contributions to the fund on an assured, broad-based and additional basis.

25. Resources should be advanced to the operational organizations of the system on the
understanding that they would reimburse the fund in the first instance from the voluntary
contributions received in response to consolidated appeals.

26. The operation of the fund should be reviewed after two years.

(b) Additional measures for rapid response

27. The United Nations should, building upon the existing capacities of relevant organi-
zations, establish a central register of all specialized personnel and teams of technical
specialists, as well as relief supplies, equipment and services available within the United
Nations system and from Governments and intergovernmental and non-governmental
organizations, that can be called upon at short notice by the United Nations.

28. The United Nations should continue to make appropriate arrangements with inter-
ested Governments and intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations to enable
it to have more expeditious access, when necessary, to their emergency relief capacities,
including food reserves, emergency stockpiles and personnel, as well as logistic support.
In the context of the annual report to the General Assembly mentioned in paragraph 35 (i)
below, the Secretary-General is requested to report on progress in this regard.

29. Special emergency rules and procedures should be developed by the United Nations
to enable all organizations to disburse quickly emergency funds, and to procure emergency
supplies and equipment, as well as to recruit emergency staff.

30. Disaster-prone countries should develop special emergency procedures to expedite
the rapid procurement and deployment of equipment and relief supplies.

V.   CONSOLIDATED APPEALS

31. For emergencies requiring a coordinated response, the Secretary-General should
ensure that an initial consolidated appeal covering all concerned organizations of the sys-
tem, prepared in consultation with the affected State, is issued within the shortest possi-
ble time and in any event not longer than one week. In the case of prolonged emergencies,
this initial appeal should be updated and elaborated within four weeks, as more informa-
tion becomes available.

32. Potential donors should adopt necessary measures to increase and expedite their
contributions, including setting aside, on a stand-by basis, financial and other resources


                                                                9 | REFERENCE GUIDE / 2015
that can be disbursed quickly to the United Nations system in response to the consolidated
appeals of the Secretary-General.

VI. COORDINATION, COOPERATION AND LEADERSHIP
(a) Leadership of the Secretary-General

33. The leadership role of the Secretary-General is critical and must be strengthened to
ensure better preparation for, as well as rapid and coherent response to, natural disasters
and other emergencies. This should be achieved through coordinated support for preven-
tion and preparedness measures and the optimal utilization of, inter alia, an inter-agency
standing committee, consolidated appeals, a central emergency revolving fund and a reg-
ister of stand- by capacities.

34. To this end, and on the understanding that the requisite resources envisaged in par-
agraph 24 above would be provided, a high-level official (emergency relief coordinator)
would be designated by the Secretary-General to work closely with and with direct access
to him, in cooperation with the relevant organizations and entities of the system dealing
with humanitarian assistance and in full respect of their mandates, without prejudice to
any decisions to be taken by the General Assembly on the overall restructuring of the
Secretariat of the United Nations. This high-level official should combine the functions
at present carried out in the coordination of United Nations response by representatives
of the Secretary-General for major and complex emergencies, as well as by the United
Nations Disaster Relief Coordinator.

35. Under the aegis of the General Assembly and working under the direction of the
Secretary-General, the high-level official would have the following responsibilities:
   (a) Processing requests from affected Member States for emergency assistance requir-
   ing a coordinated response;
   (b) Maintaining an overview of all emergencies through, inter alia, the systematic pool-
   ing and analysis of early-warning information as envisaged in paragraph 19 above,
   with a view to coordinating and facilitating the humanitarian assistance of the United
   Nations system to those emergencies that require a coordinated response;
   (c) Organizing, in consultation with the Government of the affected country, a joint
   inter-agency needs-assessment mission and preparing a consolidated appeal to be
   issued by the Secretary-General, to be followed by periodic situation reports including
   information on all sources of external assistance;
   (d) Actively facilitating, including through negotiation if needed, the access by the
   operational organizations to emergency areas for the rapid provision of emergency
   assistance by obtaining the consent of all parties concerned, through modalities such
   as the establishment of temporary relief corridors where needed, days and zones of
   tranquility and other forms;


10 | REFERENCE GUIDE / 2015
   (e) Managing, in consultation with the operational organizations concerned, the central
   emergency revolving fund and assisting in the mobilization of resources;

   (f) Serving as a central focal point with Governments and intergovernmental and non-
   governmental organizations concerning United Nations emergency relief operations
   and, when appropriate and necessary, mobilizing their emergency relief capacities,
   including through consultations in his capacity as Chairman of the Inter-Agency Stand-
   ing Committee;

   (g) Providing consolidated information, including early warning on emergencies, to all
   interested Governments and concerned authorities, particularly affected and disaster-
   prone countries, drawing on the capacities of the organizations of the system and other
   available sources;

   (h) Actively promoting, in close collaboration with concerned organizations, the smooth
   transition from relief to rehabilitation and reconstruction as relief operations under his
   aegis are phased out;

   (i) Preparing an annual report for the Secretary-General on the coordination of humani-
   tarian emergency assistance, including information on the central emergency revolv-
   ing fund, to be submitted to the General Assembly through the Economic and Social
   Council.

36. The high-level official should be supported by a secretariat based on a strengthened
Office of the United Nations Disaster Relief Coordinator and the consolidation of existing
offices that deal with complex emergencies. This secretariat could be supplemented by
staff seconded from concerned organizations of the system. The high-level official should
work closely with organizations and entities of the United Nations system, as well as the
International Committee of the Red Cross, the League of Red Cross and Red Crescent
Societies, the International Organization for Migration and relevant non-governmental
organizations. At the country level, the high-level official would maintain close contact
with and provide leadership to the resident coordinators on matters relating to humanitar-
ian assistance.

37. The Secretary-General should ensure that arrangements between the high-level offi-
cial and all relevant organizations are set in place, establishing responsibilities for prompt
and coordinated action in the event of emergency.

(b) Inter-Agency Standing Committee

38. An Inter-Agency Standing Committee serviced by a strengthened Office of the United
Nations Disaster Relief Coordinator should be established under the chairmanship of the
high-level official with the participation of all operational organizations and with a stand-
ing invitation to the International Committee of the Red Cross, the League of Red Cross
and Red Crescent Societies, and the International Organization for Migration. Relevant


                                                              11 | REFERENCE GUIDE / 2015
non-governmental organizations can be invited to participate on an ad hoc basis. The Com-
mittee should meet as soon as possible in response to emergencies.

(c) Country-level coordination

39. Within the overall framework described above and in support of the efforts of the
affected countries, the resident coordinator should normally coordinate the humanitarian
assistance of the United Nations system at the country level. He/She should facilitate the
preparedness of the United Nations system and assist in a speedy transition from relief
to development. He/She should promote the use of all locally or regionally available relief
capacities. The resident coordinator should chair an emergency operations group of field
representatives and experts from the system.

VII. CONTINUUM FROM RELIEF TO REHABILITATION AND DEVELOPMENT

40. Emergency assistance must be provided in ways that will be supportive of recovery
and long-term development. Development assistance organizations of the United Nations
system should be involved at an early stage and should collaborate closely with those
responsible for emergency relief and recovery, within their existing mandates.

41. International cooperation and support for rehabilitation and reconstruction should
continue with sustained intensity after the initial relief stage. The rehabilitation phase
should be used as an opportunity to restructure and improve facilities and services
destroyed by emergencies in order to enable them to withstand the impact of future
emergencies.

42. International cooperation should be accelerated for the development of developing
countries, thereby contributing to reducing the occurrence and impact of future disasters
and emergencies.




12 | REFERENCE GUIDE / 2015
                                I.   GUIDING PRINCIPLES




13   | REFERENCE GUIDE / 2015
1.    Principles and Framework for Humanitarian Assistance
REFERENCE                                                                                                              LEGISLATIVE DECISION

Overarching principles, policies and guidelines
1.    Humanitarian assistance is of cardinal importance for the victims of natural disasters and other                 A/RES/46/182, op1 (1991)
                                                                                                                       Strengthening Coordination
      emergencies;
2.    Humanitarian assistance must be provided in accordance with the principles of humanity, neutrality               A/RES/46/182, op2 (1991)
                                                                                                                       Strengthening Coordination
      and impartiality;
3.    Recognizing that independence, meaning the autonomy of humanitarian objectives from the political, eco-          A/RES/58/114, pp5 (2003)
                                                                                                                       Strengthening Coordination
      nomic, military or other objectives that any actor may hold with regard to areas where humanitarian action
      is being implemented, is also an important guiding principle for the provision of humanitarian assistance;
4.    The sovereignty, territorial integrity and national unity of States must be fully respected in accordance        A/RES/46/182, op3 (1991)
                                                                                                                       Strengthening Coordination
      with the Charter of the United Nations. In this context, humanitarian assistance should be provided with the
      consent of the affected country and in principle on the basis of an appeal by the affected country;
5.    The Council reaffirms that humanitarian operations are generally implemented through close coopera-              E/1998/1, op4
                                                                                                                       ECOSOC Strengthening Coordination
      tion among Governments and the United Nations, its agencies, other international organizations and
      non-governmental organizations. Each State has the responsibility first and foremost to take care
      of the victims of natural disasters and other emergencies occurring on its territory. Hence, the
      affected State has the primary role in the initiation, organization, coordination and implementation of
      humanitarian assistance within its territory. The magnitude and duration of many emergencies may be
                                                                                                         [continues]


                                                                                                                       14 | REFERENCE GUIDE / 2014
[cont.] beyond the response capacity of many affected countries. International cooperation to address emer-
     gency situations and strengthen the response capacity of affected countries is thus of great importance.
     Such cooperation should be provided in accordance with international law and national laws. Inter-
     governmental and non-governmental organizations working impartially and with strictly humanitarian
     motives should continue to make a significant contribution in supplementing national efforts;
6.   The Council affirms its support for the principles and norms of international humanitarian law, and             E/1998/1, op6
                                                                                                                     ECOSOC Strengthening Coordination
     stresses the urgent need to ensure respect for and promotion of these principles and norms. The Council is
     also concerned by the increasingly difficult context in which humanitarian assistance in some areas takes
     place, in particular the continuous erosion, in many cases, of the respect for international humanitarian law
     and principles, through deliberate violence both against civilians, particularly women and children, and aid
     workers. The Council welcomes the continued efforts of the Special Representative of the Secretary-
     General for Children and Armed Conflict to prevent the targeting of women and children in conflict
     situations, stop the recruitment and use of children as soldiers in hostilities in violation of international
     law, and support the demobilization and reintegration of child soldiers. The Council notes the importance of
     engaging a much wider segment of civil society in raising awareness for humanitarian issues and respect
     for international humanitarian law and principles, and in supporting humanitarian programmes;
7.   Encourages humanitarian agencies to ensure, to the extent possible, the participation of those                  E/2003/5, op15
                                                                                                                     ECOSOC Strengthening Coordination
     affected by humanitarian situations in the design, implementation and evaluation of humanitarian
     assistance activities, while respecting the role of authorities of affected countries;
8.   Supports the efforts of the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs to ensure that the design       E/2004/50, op17
                                                                                                                     ECOSOC Strengthening Coordination
     and implementation of United Nations integrated missions take into account the principles of
     neutrality, humanity and impartiality as well as the independence of humanitarian objectives
     for the provision of humanitarian assistance;
                                                                                                                     15 | REFERENCE GUIDE / 2015
9.    Also stresses that humanitarian assistance for natural disasters should be provided in accordance with    A/RES/59/212, op5 (2004)
                                                                                                                Cooperation in Natural Disasters
      and with due respect for the guiding principles contained in the annex to resolution 46/182 and           See also: Cooperation in Natural Disasters
      should be determined on the basis of the human dimension and needs arising out of the particular            A/RES/58/25, op5 (2003)
                                                                                                                  A/RES/57/152, op5 (2002)
      natural disasters;                                                                                          A/RES/56/103, op5 (2001)
                                                                                                                  A/RES/55/163, op2 (2000)
                                                                                                                  A/RES/54/233, op2 (1999)

10.   Reaffirming the principles of neutrality, humanity, impartiality and independence for the provision       A/RES/65/133, pp3 (2010)
                                                                                                                Strengthening Coordination
      of humanitarian assistance, and reaffirming also the need for all actors engaged in the provision of      See also: Strengthening Coordination
      humanitarian assistance in situations of complex emergencies and natural disasters to promote and fully     A/RES/64/76, pp3 (2009)
                                                                                                                  A/RES/63/139, pp3 (2008)
      respect these principles;                                                                                   A/RES/62/94, pp3 (2007)
                                                                                                                  A/RES/61/134, pp4 (2006)
                                                                                                                  A/RES/60/124, pp4 (2005)
                                                                                                                  A/RES/59/141, pp2 (2004)
                                                                                                                  A/RES/58/114, pp4 (2003)
                                                                                                                ECOSOC Strengthening Coordination
                                                                                                                  E/2011/8, pp2
                                                                                                                  E/2010/1, pp2
                                                                                                                  E/2009/3, pp5
                                                                                                                  E/2008/36, pp5
                                                                                                                  E/2004/50, pp7
                                                                                                                  E/2003/5, pp4
                                                                                                                Safety and Security
                                                                                                                   A/RES/65/132, pp6 (2010)
                                                                                                                   A/RES/64/77, pp6 (2009)
                                                                                                                   A/RES/63/138, pp6 (2008)
                                                                                                                Cooperation in Natural Disasters
                                                                                                                  A/RES/65/264, pp2 (2011)
                                                                                                                  A/RES/64/251, pp2 (2010)
                                                                                                                  A/RES/63/141, pp2 (2008)

                                                                                                                                              [cont.]



                                                                                                                16 | REFERENCE GUIDE / 2015
                                                                                                                 [cont.]
                                                                                                                    A/RES/62/92, pp2 (2007)
                                                                                                                    A/RES/61/131, pp2 (2006)
                                                                                                                    A/RES/60/125, pp2 (2005)
                                                                                                                    A/RES/59/212, pp2 (2004)
                                                                                                                    A/RES/58/25, pp2 (2003)
                                                                                                                    A/RES/57/152, pp2 (2002)
                                                                                                                    A/RES/56/103, pp2 (2001)
                                                                                                                    A/RES/55/163, pp3 (2000)
                                                                                                                    A/RES/54/233, pp3 (1999)

11.   Urges all actors engaged in the provision of humanitarian assistance to fully commit to and duly respect   E/2014/13, op27
                                                                                                                 ECOSOC Strengthening Coordination
      the guiding principles contained in the annex to General Assembly resolution 46/182 of 19 December         See also: ECOSOC Strengthening Coordination
      1991, including the humanitarian principles of humanity, impartiality and neutrality, as well as the         E/2013/6, op23
                                                                                                                   E/2012/3, op24
      principle of independence, as adopted by the Assembly in its resolution 58/114 of 17 December 2003;          E/2011/8, op19
                                                                                                                   E/2010/1, op12
                                                                                                                   E/2009/3, op11
                                                                                                                   E/1999/1, op1, op3

12.   Reaffirms the principles of neutrality, humanity, impartiality and independence for the provision of       A/RES/65/307, op1 (2011)
                                                                                                                 Military and Civil Defence Assets
      humanitarian assistance;
13.   Also recognizes that accountability is an integral part of effective humanitarian assistance, and          A/RES/69/135, op14 (2014)
                                                                                                                 Strengthening Coordination
      emphasizes the need for enhancing the accountability of humanitarian actors at all stages of humanitar-    See also: Strengthening Coordination
      ian assistance;                                                                                              A/RES/68/102, op13 (2013)
                                                                                                                   A/RES/67/87, op11 (2012)
                                                                                                                 ECOSOC Strengthening Coordination
                                                                                                                   E/2014/13, op25
                                                                                                                   E/2013/6, op21




                                                                                                                 17 | REFERENCE GUIDE / 2015
Dispositions addressed to Member States
14.   Each state has the responsibility first and foremost to take care of the victims of natural dis-           A/RES/46/182, op4 (1991)
                                                                                                                 Strengthening Coordination
      asters and other emergencies occurring on its territory. Hence, the affected State has the primary
      role in the initiation, organization, coordination, and implementation of humanitarian assistance within
      its territory;
15.   States in proximity to emergencies are urged to participate closely with the affected countries in         A/RES/46/182, op7 (1991)
                                                                                                                 Strengthening Coordination
      international efforts, with a view to facilitating, to the extent possible, the transit of humanitarian
      assistance;
16.   The Council expresses its concern, in the year of the fiftieth anniversary of the adoption of the Geneva   E/1999/1, op4
                                                                                                                 ECOSOC Strengthening Coordination
      Conventions, about the continuous erosion, in many cases, in the respect for international human-
      itarian and human rights law and principles, both in terms of denial of safe and unimpeded
      access to people in need and through deliberate violence against all those protected under inter-
      national humanitarian law, especially women and children. The Council therefore calls upon all parties
      to conflicts to respect international humanitarian and human rights law and stresses the importance
      for all Governments, relevant United Nations system actors, nongovernmental organizations and other
      partners to further promote and diffuse such laws and integrate them into their activities. The Council
      also calls upon all parties to take measures to ensure the safety and security of international and
      local humanitarian personnel. Furthermore, the Council calls upon all States to consider signing and
      ratifying the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court;




                                                                                                                 18 | REFERENCE GUIDE / 2015
17.   Welcomes the initiatives at the regional and national levels related to the implementation of the Guide-     A/RES/69/135, op16 (2014)
                                                                                                                   Strengthening Coordination
      lines for the Domestic Facilitation and Regulation of International Disaster Relief and Initial              See also: Strengthening Coordination
      Recovery Assistance, adopted at the Thirtieth International Conference of the Red Cross and Red                A/RES/65/133, op11 (2010)
                                                                                                                     A/RES/64/76, op10 (2009)
      Crescent, held in Geneva from 26 to 30 November 2007, and encourages Member States and, where                  A/RES/63/139, op8 (2008)
      applicable, regional organizations, to take further steps to strengthen operational and legal frameworks     ECOSOC Strengthening Coordination
                                                                                                                     E/2011/8, op6
      for international disaster relief, taking into account the Guidelines, as appropriate;                         E/2010/1, op5
                                                                                                                     E/2009/3, op5
                                                                                                                     E/2008/36, op5
                                                                                                                   Cooperation in Natural Disasters
                                                                                                                     A/RES/65/264, op7 (2011)
                                                                                                                     A/RES/64/251, op7 (2010)
                                                                                                                     A/RES/63/141, op5 (2008)

18.   Calls upon all States, all parties involved in armed conflict and all humanitarian actors to respect the     A/RES/65/132, op8 (2010)
                                                                                                                   Safety and Security
      principles of neutrality, humanity, impartiality and independence for the provision of humanitar-            See also: Safety and Security
      ian assistance;                                                                                                A/RES/64/77, op8 (2009)
                                                                                                                     A/RES/63/128, op8 (2008)

19.   Calls upon all parties to armed conflicts to comply with their obligations under international humani-       E/2014/13, op29
                                                                                                                   ECOSOC Strengthening Coordination
      tarian law, human rights law and refugee law;                                                                See also: ECOSOC Strengthening Coordination
                                                                                                                     E/2013/6, op25
                                                                                                                     E/2012/3, op26E/2011/8, op21
                                                                                                                     E/2010/1, op14

20.   Calls upon all States and parties to comply fully with the provisions of international humanitarian          E/2014/13, op30
                                                                                                                   ECOSOC Strengthening Coordination
      law, including all the Geneva Conventions of 12 August 1949, in particular the Geneva Convention             See also: ECOSOC Strengthening Coordination
      relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War, in order to protect and assist civilians in     E/2013/6, op26
                                                                                                                     E/2012/3, op27
      occupied territories, and in that regard urges the international community and the relevant organizations      E/2011/8, op22
                                                                                                                     E/2010/1, op15
      of the United Nations system to strengthen humanitarian assistance to civilians in those situations;           E/2009/3, op14
                                                                                                                     E/2004/50, op7



                                                                                                                   19 | REFERENCE GUIDE / 2015
21.   Encourages Member States, in cooperation with relevant United Nations humanitarian organizations,           A/RES/69/135, op 42 (2014)
                                                                                                                  Strengthening Coordination
      to ensure that the basic humanitarian needs of affected populations, including clean water, food,           See also: Strengthening Coordination
      shelter, health including sexual and reproductive health, education and protection, are addressed as          A/RES/68/102, op36 (2013)

      components of humanitarian response, including through providing timely and adequate resources, while
      ensuring that their collaborative efforts fully adhere to humanitarian principles;
22.   Encourages Member States, in cooperation with relevant United Nations humanitarian organizations, to        E/2014/13, op31
                                                                                                                  ECOSOC Strengthening Coordination
      ensure that the basic humanitarian needs of affected populations, including food, shelter, clean            See also: ECOSOC Strengthening Coordination
      water, education and protection, are components of humanitarian response, including through providing         E/2013/6, op27

      timely and adequate resources with the aim of ensuring the immediate restoration of safe conditions of
      life, alleviating the immediate effects of humanitarian emergencies and contributing towards long-term
      recovery and reconstruction, while ensuring that their collaborative efforts fully adhere to humanitarian
      principles;
Dispositions addressed to the United Nations and/or the humanitarian system in general
23.   The magnitude and duration of many emergencies may be beyond the response capacity of many affected         A/RES/46/182, op5 (1991)
                                                                                                                  Strengthening Coordination
      countries. International cooperation to address emergency situations and to strengthen the
      response capacity of affected countries is thus of great importance. Such cooperation should
      be provided in accordance with international law and national laws. Intergovernmental and non-govern-
      mental organizations working impartially and with strictly humanitarian motives should continue to make
      a significant contribution in supplementing national efforts;
24.   Contributions for humanitarian assistance should be provided in a way which is not to the detriment         A/RES/46/182, op11 (1991)
                                                                                                                  Strengthening Coordination
      of resources made available for international cooperation for development;



                                                                                                                  20 | REFERENCE GUIDE / 2015
25.   The Council notes the importance of engaging a much wider segment of civil society in raising aware-        E/1998/1, op6
                                                                                                                  ECOSOC Strengthening Coordination
      ness for humanitarian issues and respect for international humanitarian law and principles, and in sup-
      porting humanitarian programmes;
26.   Encourages, in this regard, the United Nations system and its Member States to urge international humani-   E/2004/50, op38
                                                                                                                  ECOSOC Strengthening Coordination
      tarian organizations and implementing partners serving within the framework of United Nations humanitar-
      ian and other relevant operations to live up to the highest standards of conduct and accountability;
27.   Calls upon the relevant organizations of the United Nations system and, as appropriate, other relevant      E/2008/36, op6
                                                                                                                  ECOSOC Strengthening Coordination
      humanitarian actors to continue to strengthen the coordination of humanitarian assistance at the field
      level, including with national authorities of the affected State, as appropriate, and to further enhance
      transparency, performance and accountability;
28.   Calls upon the relevant organizations of the United Nations system and, as appropriate, other relevant      A/RES/69/135, op8 (2014)
                                                                                                                  Strengthening Coordination
      humanitarian actors to continue efforts to improve the humanitarian response to natural and man-made        See also: Strengthening Coordination
      disasters and complex emergencies by further strengthening humanitarian response capacities at all            A/RES/68/102, op7 (2013)
                                                                                                                    A/RES/67/87, op6 (2012)
      levels, by continuing to strengthen the provision and coordination of humanitarian assistance at              A/RES/66/119, op6 (2011)
                                                                                                                    A/RES/65/133, op3 (2010)
      the global and field levels, including through existing cluster coordination mechanisms and in support of     A/RES/64/76, op3 (2009)
      national authorities of the affected State, as appropriate, and by further enhancing efficiency, trans-       A/RES/63/139, op3 (2008)
                                                                                                                    A/RES/62/94, op4 (2007)
      parency, performance and accountability;                                                                      A/RES/61/134, op3 (2007)
                                                                                                                    A/RES/60/124, op11 (2006)

29.   Encourages United Nations humanitarian organizations and other relevant organizations, while strength-      E/2014/13, op14
                                                                                                                  ECOSOC Strengthening Coordination
      ening the coordination of humanitarian assistance in the field, to continue to work in close coordination
                                                                                                                  See also: ECOSOC Strengthening Coordination
      with national Governments, taking into account the primary role of the affected State in the initia-          E/2011/8, op11
                                                                                                                    E/2010/1, op9
      tion, organization, coordination and implementation of such assistance within its territory;                  E/2009/3, op9



                                                                                                                  21 | REFERENCE GUIDE / 2015
30.   Calls upon the United Nations and its humanitarian partners to enhance accountability to Member            A/RES/69/135, op34 (2014)
                                                                                                                 Strengthening Coordination
      States, including affected States, and all other stakeholders, and to further strengthen humanitarian
                                                                                                                 See also: Strengthening Coordination
      response efforts, including through monitoring and evaluating the provision of their humanitarian assis-     A/RES/68/102, op 30 (2013)
                                                                                                                   A/RES/67/87, op28 (2012)
      tance, incorporating lessons learned into programming, and consulting with the affected populations so       A/RES/66/119, op22 (2011)
      that their needs are appropriately addressed;                                                              ECOSOC Strengthening Coordination
                                                                                                                   E/2014/13, op26
                                                                                                                   E/2013/6, op22
                                                                                                                   E/2012/3, op23
                                                                                                                   E/2011/8, op18

Dispositions addressed to specific actors
31.   Stresses the importance of the Emergency Relief Coordinator participating fully in the overall United      A/RES/48/57, op18 (1993)
                                                                                                                 Strengthening Coordination
      Nations planning of responses to emergencies in order to serve as the humanitarian advocate in ensuring    See also: ECOSOC Strengthening Coordination
      that the humanitarian dimension, particularly the principles of humanity, neutrality and impartiality of     E/1993/1, op5

      relief assistance, is taken fully into account;
32.   Calls upon the Secretary-General to ensure that the design and implementation of United Nations            A/RES/59/141, op9 (2004)
                                                                                                                 Strengthening Coordination
      integrated missions take into account the principles of humanity, neutrality and impartiality as well
      as independence for the provision of humanitarian assistance;
33.   Supports the efforts of the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs to ensure that the         E/2004/50, op17
                                                                                                                 ECOSOC Strengthening Coordination
      design and implementation of United Nations integrated missions take into account the principles
      of neutrality, humanity and impartiality as well as the independence of humanitarian objectives for the
      provision of humanitarian assistance;




                                                                                                                 22 | REFERENCE GUIDE / 2015
34.   Recommends to the General Assembly that it request the Secretary-General to ensure that United                 E/2005/4, op19
                                                                                                                     ECOSOC Strengthening Coordination
      Nations humanitarian organizations work, as appropriate, with the Department of Peacekeeping Operations
      of the Secretariat in order to better ensure that humanitarian issues are accounted for from the earliest
      stages of planning and design of United Nations multidimensional integrated peacekeeping operations
      with humanitarian components and that the mandates of such operations continue to respect the need for
      their humanitarian activities to be carried out in accordance with humanitarian principles;

2.    Humanitarian Access
REFERENCE                                                                                                            LEGISLATIVE DECISION

Overarching principles, policies and guidelines
35.   The Council expresses its concern, in the year of the fiftieth anniversary of the adoption of the Geneva       E/1999/1, op4
                                                                                                                     ECOSOC Strengthening Coordination
      Conventions, about the continuous erosion, in many cases, in the respect for international humanitarian
      and human rights law and principles, both in terms of denial of safe and unimpeded access to peo-
      ple in need and through deliberate violence against all those protected under international humanitar-
      ian law, especially women and children;
Dispositions addressed to Member States
36.   States whose populations are in need of humanitarian assistance are called upon to facilitate the work         A/RES/46/182, op6 (1991)
                                                                                                                     Strengthening Coordination
      of these organizations in implementing humanitarian assistance, in particular the supply of food, medi-
      cines, shelter and health care, for which access to victims is essential;
37.   States in proximity to emergencies are urged to participate closely with the affected countries in interna-    A/RES/46/182, op7 (1991)
                                                                                                                     Strengthening Coordination
      tional efforts, with a view to facilitating, to the extent possible, the transit of humanitarian assistance;


                                                                                                                     23 | REFERENCE GUIDE / 2015
38.   Calls upon all States and parties in complex humanitarian emergencies, in particular in armed conflict         A/RES/69/135, op49 (2014)
                                                                                                                     Strengthening Coordination
      and in post-conflict situations, in countries in which humanitarian personnel are operating, in conformity     See also: Strengthening Coordination
      with the relevant provisions of international law and national laws, to cooperate fully with the United          A/RES/68/102, op 41 (2013)
                                                                                                                       A/RES/67/87, op37 (2012)
      Nations and other humanitarian agencies and organizations and to ensure the safe and unhindered                  A/RES/66/119, op33 (2011)
      access of humanitarian personnel, as well as delivery of supplies and equipment, in order to                   ECOSOC Strengthening Coordination
                                                                                                                       E/2014/13, op28
      allow such personnel to efficiently perform their task of assisting affected civilian populations, including     E/2013/6, op24
                                                                                                                       E/2012/3, op25
      refugees and internally displaced persons;                                                                       E/2011/8, op20
                                                                                                                       E/2010/1, op13
                                                                                                                     Safety and Security
                                                                                                                        A/RES/65/132, op4 (2010)
                                                                                                                        A/RES/64/77, op4 (2009)
                                                                                                                        A/RES/63/128, op4 (2008)

39.   Encourages all Member States to facilitate, to the extent possible, the transit of emergency humani-           A/RES/69/263, op19 (2014)
                                                                                                                     Cooperation in Natural Disasters
      tarian assistance and development assistance, provided in the context of international efforts,                See also: Cooperation in Natural Disasters
      including in the phase from relief to development, in full accordance with the provisions of resolution          A/RES/68/103, op18 (2013)
                                                                                                                       A/RES/67/231, op16 (2012)
      46/182 and the annex thereto, and in full respect of the humanitarian principles of humanity, neutral-           A/RES/66/277, op16 (2011)
                                                                                                                       A/RES/66/277, op14 (2011)
      ity, impartiality and independence, and their obligations under international law, including international       A/RES/64/251, op14 (2010)
      humanitarian law;
Dispositions addressed to the United Nations and/or the humanitarian system in general
40.   Expresses concern at the challenges related to, inter alia, safe access to and use of fuel, firewood,          A/RES/69/135, op20 (2014)
                                                                                                                     Strengthening Coordination
      alternative energy, water and sanitation, shelter and food and health-care services in human-                  See also: Strengthening Coordination
      itarian emergencies, and takes note with appreciation of initiatives at the national and international           A/RES/68/102, op18 (2013)
                                                                                                                       A/RES/67/87, op15 (2012)
      levels that promote effective cooperation in this regard;                                                        A/RES/66/119, op12 (2011)
                                                                                                                       A/RES/65/133, op9 (2010)




                                                                                                                     24 | REFERENCE GUIDE / 2015
41.   Expresses concern at the challenges related to, inter alia, safe access to and use of fuel, firewood and   E/2014/13, op21
                                                                                                                 ECOSOC Strengthening Coordination
      alternative energy, telecommunications, water and sanitation, shelter and food, and health                 See also: ECOSOC Strengthening Coordination
      care in humanitarian emergencies, and notes with appreciation initiatives at the national and interna-       E/2014/13, op21
                                                                                                                   E/2013/6, op17
      tional levels that promote effective cooperation in that regard;                                             E/2012/3, op17
                                                                                                                   E/2011/8, op14

Dispositions addressed to specific actors
42.   Under the aegis of the General Assembly and working under the direction of the Secretary-General, the      A/RES/46/182, op35 (d) (1991)
                                                                                                                 Strengthening Coordination
      high-level official [Emergency Relief Coordinator] would have the following responsibilities: […](d)
      Actively facilitating, including through negotiation if needed, the access by the operational organiza-
      tions to emergency areas for the rapid provision of emergency assistance by obtaining the consent of
      all parties concerned, through modalities such as the establishment of temporary relief corridors where
      needed, days and zones of tranquility and other forms;

3.    Gender, Vulnerable Groups
REFERENCE                                                                                                        LEGISLATIVE DECISION

Dispositions addressed to Member States
43.   Encourages Governments as well as international humanitarian organizations, as appropriate, to take        E/2004/50, op37
                                                                                                                 ECOSOC Strengthening Coordination
      further initiatives to prevent, address and follow up on allegations of sexual exploitation and abuse      See also: ECOSOC Strengthening Coordination
      in humanitarian emergencies, and emphasizes that the highest standards of conduct and account-               E/2003/5, op12

      ability are required of all personnel serving in humanitarian and peacekeeping operations;




                                                                                                                 25 | REFERENCE GUIDE / 2015
44.   Also calls upon States to elaborate and implement strategies to report on, prevent and punish all forms      A/RES/60/124, op5 (2005)
                                                                                                                   Strengthening Coordination
      of violence against women, girls and boys, in particular sexual violence and abuse;
45.   Calls upon all Member States, and encourages the relevant organizations of the United Nations to             A/RES/62/94, op22 (2007)
                                                                                                                   Strengthening Coordination
      strengthen support services, including psychosocial support, to victims of gender-based vio-                 See also: Strengthening Coordination
      lence in humanitarian emergencies;                                                                             A/RES/61/134, op19 (2006)


46.   Urges all Member States to address gender-based violence in humanitarian emergencies and to                  A/RES/65/133, op25 (2010)
                                                                                                                   Strengthening Coordination
      ensure that their laws and institutions are adequate to prevent, promptly investigate and prosecute          See also: Strengthening Coordination
      acts of gender-based violence, and calls upon States, the United Nations and all relevant humanitar-           A/RES/64/76, op24 (2009)
                                                                                                                     A/RES/63/139, op23 (2008)
      ian organizations to improve coordination, harmonize response and strengthen capacity, with a view to          A/RES/61/134, op18 (2007)
      reducing such violence, and in support services to victims of such violence;                                 ECOSOC Strengthening Coordination
                                                                                                                     E/2013/6, op31
                                                                                                                     E/2012/3, op31
                                                                                                                     E/2011/8, op27
                                                                                                                     E/2010/1, op21
                                                                                                                     E/2009/3, op9
                                                                                                                     E/2008/36, op14
                                                                                                                     E/2004/50, op33

47.   Expresses deep concern about the full range of threats and human rights violations and abuses                A/RES/68/180, op7 (2013)
                                                                                                                   Protection of and Assistance to IDPs
      experienced by internally displaced women and girls in armed conflict and post-conflict
      situations, recognizing that those women and girls who are particularly vulnerable or disadvantaged
      may be specifically targeted or at increased risk of violence, and recognizes the need to provide better
      support to victims and to support both national and international efforts to build the capacity to prevent
      and respond to sexual violence in conflict;




                                                                                                                   26 | REFERENCE GUIDE / 2015
48.   Urges all Member States to address gender-based violence in humanitarian emergencies in a                      A/RES/69/135, op47 (2014)
                                                                                                                     Strengthening Coordination
      strengthened manner and to ensure that their laws based violence, and calls upon States, the                   See also: Strengthening Coordination
      United Nations and all relevant humanitarian organizations to improve coordination, harmonize response           A/RES/68/102, op39 (2013)
                                                                                                                       A/RES/67/87, op35 (2012)
      and strengthen capacity, with a view to preventing and reducing such violence and ensuring that humani-          A/RES/66/119, op31 (2011)
      tarian relief is provided in a way that mitigates the risk of gender-based violence, and to ensure that        ECOSOC Strengthening Coordination
                                                                                                                       E/2011/8, op27
      support services to victims and survivors of such violence are given due priority, beginning in the earliest     E/2010/1, op21
                                                                                                                       E/2009/3, op9
      stages of emergency response;                                                                                    E/2008/36, op14
                                                                                                                       E/2004/50, op33

49.   Encourages Governments, local authorities, the United Nations system and regional organizations, and           A/RES/69/243, op35 (2014)
                                                                                                                     Cooperation in Natural Disasters
      invites donors and other assisting countries, to address the vulnerabilities and capacities of women and       See also: Cooperation in Natural Disasters
      girls through gender-responsive programming, including means to address sexual and gender-based                  A/RES/68/103, op34 (2013)
                                                                                                                     ECOSOC Strengthening Coordination
      violence and various forms of exploitation during emergencies and in post-disaster environments, and             E/2014/13, op34
      the allocation of resources in their disaster risk reduction, response and recovery efforts in coordination
      with the Governments of affected countries;
50.   Emphasises the importance of mainstreaming the perspective of persons with disabilities in disaster            A/RES/69/243, op36 (2014)
                                                                                                                     Cooperation in Natural Disasters
      risk reduction, and recognizes the need for their inclusive participation in and contribution to disaster
      preparedness, emergency response, recovery and transition from relief to development, as well as the
      implementation of policies and programmes that are inclusive of and accessible to persons with disabilities;
51.   Reaffirms the obligation of all States and parties to an armed conflict to protect civilians in armed          A/RES/69/135, op44 (2014)
                                                                                                                     Strengthening Coordination
      conflicts in accordance with international humanitarian law, and invites States to promote a culture           See also: Strengthening Coordination
      of protection, taking into account the particular needs of women, children, older persons and                    A/RES/68/102, op36 (2013)
                                                                                                                       A/RES/67/87, op33 (2012)
      persons with disabilities;                                                                                       A/RES/66/119, op29 (2011)




                                                                                                                     27 | REFERENCE GUIDE / 2015
Dispositions addressed to the United Nations and/or the humanitarian system in general
52.   The Council recognizes that all humanitarian emergencies have a direct and particular impact on chil-            E/1999/1, op22
                                                                                                                       ECOSOC Strengthening Coordination
      dren. The Council underlines the need to respect and ensure every child’s rights as contained in the
      Convention on the Rights of the Child and calls for efforts to enhance international standards for the
      rights of the child. Violation of these rights often results in irreparable damage. The Council also calls for
      systematic, concerted and comprehensive inter-agency efforts on behalf of children, as well as adequate
      and sustainable resource allocation to provide both immediate emergency assistance and longterm
      measures to children, throughout all phases of an emergency. The Council underlines the importance
      of recognizing and addressing the specific vulnerabilities of children and adolescents in armed conflict.
      Given the longterm consequences for society, the Council underlines the importance of including specific
      provisions for children in peace agreements and in arrangements negotiated by parties to conflicts as
      well as in transitions from relief to rehabilitation, reconstruction and development. The Council particu-
      larly recognizes the importance of earliest efforts to demobilize, reintegrate and rehabilitate children
      who have been used in armed conflict. The Council welcomes the continued efforts of the Special Rep-
      resentative for Children and Armed Conflict and encourages followup to his recommendations by all
      concerned parties;

53.   The Council recognizes that all humanitarian emergencies have gender-specific impacts. In this con-              E/1999/1, op24
                                                                                                                       ECOSOC Strengthening Coordination
      text, the Council recognizes that such emergencies have direct and particular impact on women. At the
      same time, the Council recognizes the positive role women can play in post-conflict peacebuilding and
      reconciliation. The Council stresses the need to integrate a gender perspective in the planning and imple-
      mentation of activities and recommends that such a perspective be further promoted, and in this regard
      notes the IASC policy statement on the integration of a gender perspective in humanitarian assistance;


                                                                                                                       28 | REFERENCE GUIDE / 2015
54.   The Council recognizes the specific vulnerabilities of older persons in humanitarian emergencies and      E/1999/1, op25
                                                                                                                ECOSOC Strengthening Coordination
      requests the Secretary-General to include in his report to the Council at its next humanitarian seg-
      ment measures taken by the United Nations to respond to the needs of older persons in humanitarian
      emergencies;
55.   The Council also recognizes the need to address the question of persons with disabilities in situations   E/1999/L.25, op26
                                                                                                                ECOSOC Strengthening Coordination
      of humanitarian emergencies;
56.   Strongly urges the United Nations system and all humanitarian organizations to adopt and implement        E/2002/32, op30
                                                                                                                ECOSOC Strengthening Coordination
      appropriate measures, including codes of conduct, for all personnel involved in humanitarian assis-
      tance activities, to review protection and distribution mechanisms, and to recommend actions that pro-
      tect against sexual abuse and exploitation and the misuse of humanitarian assistance, and requests the
      Secretary-General to report back to the Council in this regard;
57.   Welcomes the establishment by the Inter-Agency Standing Committee of the six core principles in the       E/2003/5, op11
                                                                                                                ECOSOC Strengthening Coordination
      Plan of Action on Protection from Sexual Exploitation and Abuse in Humanitarian Crises, representing
      minimum standards of behaviour required of all United Nations civilian staff members, and urges the
      United Nations to take appropriate follow-up action in response to allegations of sexual violence and
      exploitation by humanitarian workers;
58.   Encourages the United Nations system to continue to develop and implement internal tools and to take      E/2004/50, op36 (2004)
                                                                                                                ECOSOC Strengthening Coordination
      effective measures for protection from sexual exploitation and sexual abuse and, in this respect,
      notes with interest the Secretary-General’s Bulletin on special measures for protection from sexual
      exploitation and sexual abuse;




                                                                                                                29 | REFERENCE GUIDE / 2015
59.   Stresses the continued need and relevance of integrating, through implementation of all relevant resolu-    E/2004/50, op32
                                                                                                                  ECOSOC Strengthening Coordination
      tions, agreed conclusions, policies, commitments and guidelines on gender mainstreaming, a gender           See also: ECOSOC Strengthening Coordination
      perspective into the planning, programming and implementation of humanitarian assistance activities,          E/2003/5, op10
                                                                                                                    E/2002/32, op5
      and calls upon the Inter-Agency Standing Committee to undertake a review of its 1999 policy statement
      on the integration of a gender perspective into humanitarian assistance;
60.   Requests Member States, relevant humanitarian organizations of the United Nations system and other          A/RES/69/135, op44 (2014)
                                                                                                                  Strengthening Coordination
      relevant humanitarian actors to ensure that all aspects of humanitarian response, including disaster pre-   See also: Strengthening Coordination
      paredness and needs assessment, take into account the specific needs of the affected population,              A/RES/68/102, op28 (2013)
                                                                                                                    A/RES/67/87, op26 (2012)
      recognizing that giving appropriate consideration to, inter alia, gender, age and disability is               A/RES/66/119, op20 (2011)
                                                                                                                    A/RES/65/133, op17 (2010)
      part of a comprehensive and effective humanitarian response, and in this regard encourages efforts to
      ensure gender mainstreaming in the delivery of humanitarian assistance;
61.   Encourages Member States and the United Nations system to support national initiatives that address         A/65/264, op24 (2011)
                                                                                                                  Cooperation in Natural Disasters
      the possible differentiated impacts of natural disasters on the affected population, including through      See also: Cooperation in Natural Disasters
      the collection and analysis of data disaggregated, inter alia, by sex, age and disability, using, inter       A/64/251, op23 (2010)

      alia, the existing information provided by States, and through the development of tools, methods and
      procedures that will result in more timely and useful initial needs assessments;
62.   Requests Member States, relevant United Nations organizations and other relevant actors to ensure           E/2014/13, op2
                                                                                                                  ECOSOC Strengthening Coordination
      that all aspects of humanitarian response address the specific needs of women, girls, men and               See also: ECOSOC Strengthening Coordination
      boys, taking into consideration age and disability, including through improved collection, analysis           E/2013/6, op20
                                                                                                                    E/2012/3, op 20
      and reporting of sex- and age-disaggregated data, taking into account, inter alia, the information            E/2011/8, op26
                                                                                                                    E/2010/1, op20
      provided by States; and emphasizes the importance of the full participation of women in decision-making
      processes related to humanitarian response;


                                                                                                                  30 | REFERENCE GUIDE / 2015
Dispositions addressed to specific actors
63.   The Emergency Relief Coordinator, in cooperation with the Division for the Advancement of Women              E/1998/1, op8
                                                                                                                   ECOSOC Strengthening Coordination
      of the United Nations Secretariat, should ensure that a gender perspective is fully integrated into
      humanitarian activities and policies;
64.   Stresses the importance of the timely implementation of the Plan of Action on Protection from                A/RES/57/153, op9 (2002)
                                                                                                                   Strengthening Coordination
      Sexual Exploitation and Abuse in Humanitarian Crises developed by the Inter-Agency Standing
      Committee, and urges the Standing Committee to continue to refine the Plan and follow-up activities
      consistent with experience gained at the field level;
65.   Welcomes the continued efforts to address the issue of sexual exploitation and sexual abuse in the           A/RES/58/114, op13 (2003)
                                                                                                                   Strengthening Coordination
      context of humanitarian crises, and notes with interest the bulletin of the Secretary-General on special
      measures for protection from sexual exploitation and sexual abuse;
66.   Expresses concern about the continued occurrence of sexual exploitation and abuse in humanitar-              A/RES/59/141, op19 (2004)
                                                                                                                   Strengthening Coordination
      ian crises, emphasizes that the highest standards of conduct and accountability are required of all
      personnel serving in humanitarian and peacekeeping operations, and requests the Secretary-General to
      report on measures to follow up, inter alia, the Plan of Action on Protection from Sexual Exploitation and
      Abuse in Humanitarian Crises developed by the Inter-Agency Standing Committee and the application
      of the bulletin of the Secretary-General on special measures for protection from sexual exploitation and
      sexual abuse;
67.   Also requests the Secretary-General to provide an update on the Inter-Agency Standing Committee              E/2007/3, op13
                                                                                                                   ECOSOC Strengthening Coordination
      review of its 1999 policy statement on the integration of a gender perspective into humanitar-
      ian assistance and to report on steps taken in this regard;


                                                                                                                   31 | REFERENCE GUIDE / 2015
68.   Calls upon all States to adopt, where required, and to continue to implement effectively, necessary          A/RES/69/263, op6 (2014)
                                                                                                                   Cooperation in Natural Disasters
      legislative and other appropriate measures to mitigate the effects of natural disasters and                  See also: Cooperation in Natural Disasters
      integrate disaster risk reduction strategies into development planning, as well as to incor-                   A/RES/68/103, op6 (2013)
                                                                                                                     A/RES/67/231, op5 (2012)
      porate a gender perspective into policies, planning and funding, and in this regard requests the               A/RES/66/277, op6 (2011)
      international community to continue to assist developing countries as well as countries with economies
      in transition, as appropriate;
69.   Stresses the importance of the full and equal participation of women in decision-making and                  A/RES/69/263, op34 (2014)
                                                                                                                   Cooperation in Natural Disasters
      of gender mainstreaming in developing and implementing disaster risk reduction, preparedness,                See also: Cooperation in Natural Disasters
      response and recovery strategies, and in this regard requests the Secretary-General to continue ensuring       A/RES/68/103, op33 (2013)
                                                                                                                     A/RES/67/231, op29 (2012)
      that gender mainstreaming is better taken into account in all aspects of humanitarian responses and            A/RES/66/277, op26 (2011)
                                                                                                                     A/RES/64/251, op24 (2010)
      activities, including the analysis of allocations and programme implementation and through greater use
      of the gender marker;

4.    Protection of Civilians
REFERENCE                                                                                                          LEGISLATIVE DECISION

Overarching principles, policies and guidelines
70.   Strongly condemns all acts of violence committed against civilian populations in situations of               A/RES/59/141, op13 (2004)
                                                                                                                   Strengthening Coordination
      humanitarian crisis, especially against women, girls and boys, including sexual violence and abuse,
      and reiterates that such acts can constitute serious violations or grave breaches of international humani-
      tarian law and constitute, in defined circumstances, a crime against humanity and/or a war crime;




                                                                                                                   32 | REFERENCE GUIDE / 2015
71.   Reaffirms the obligation of all States and parties to an armed conflict to protect civilians in armed     A/RES/65/133, op23 (2010)
                                                                                                                Strengthening Coordination
      conflicts in accordance with international humanitarian law, and invites States to promote a              See also: Strengthening Coordination
      culture of protection, taking into account the particular needs of women, children, older persons and       A/RES/64/76, op22 (2009)
                                                                                                                  A/RES/63/139, op21 (2008)
      persons with disabilities;                                                                                  A/RES/62/94, op19 (2007)
                                                                                                                  A/RES/61/134, op21 (2007)
                                                                                                                  A/RES/60/124, op3 (2005)
                                                                                                                  A/RES/59/141, op15 (2004)
                                                                                                                  A/RES/58/114, op12 (2003)
                                                                                                                ECOSOC Strengthening Coordination
                                                                                                                  E/2004/50, op3
                                                                                                                  E/2003/5, op3
                                                                                                                  E/2002/32, op21

Dispositions addressed to Member States
72.   Notes that some of the issues affecting the protection of civilians in armed conflict could also be       E/2004/50, op4
                                                                                                                ECOSOC Strengthening Coordination
      effectively addressed at a regional level, and welcomes in this context the fact that States and some
      regional organizations, within their mandates, have increasingly taken measures to address these
      and related protection concerns;
73.   Calls upon States to adopt preventive measures and effective responses to acts of violence committed      A/RES/65/133, op24 (2010)
                                                                                                                Strengthening Coordination
      against civilian populations in armed conflicts and to ensure that those responsible are promptly         See also: Strengthening Coordination
      brought to justice, in accordance with national law and their obligations under international law;          A/RES/64/76, op23 (2009)
                                                                                                                  A/RES/63/139, op22 (2008)

74.   Encourages Member States, the United Nations and humanitarian organizations to continue to work           A/RES/69/135, op43 (2014)
                                                                                                                Strengthening Coordination
      together to understand and address the different protection needs of affected populations, par-
      ticularly the most vulnerable, in humanitarian crises, and ensure that these needs are adequately inte-
      grated into preparedness, response and recovery efforts;


                                                                                                                33 | REFERENCE GUIDE / 2015
75.   Reaffirms the obligation of all States and parties to an armed conflict to protect civilians in armed    A/RES/69/135, op44 (2014)
                                                                                                               Strengthening Coordination
      conflicts in accordance with international humanitarian law, and invites States to promote a culture
      of protection, taking into account the particular needs of women, children, older persons and
      persons with disabilities;
76.   Calls upon States to adopt preventive measures and effective responses to acts of violence               A/RES/69/135, op46 (2014)
                                                                                                               Strengthening Coordination
      committed against civilian populations in armed conflicts and to ensure that those responsible are       See also: Strengthening Coordination
      promptly brought to justice, in accordance with national law and their obligations under international     A/RES/68/102, op38 (2013)
                                                                                                                 A/RES/67/87, op34 (2012)
      law;                                                                                                       A/RES/66/119, op 30 (2011)

Dispositions addressed to the United Nations and/or the humanitarian system in general
77.   Strongly encourages the United Nations to address more systematically protection of civilians            A/RES/59/141, op6 (2004)
                                                                                                               Strengthening Coordination
      and other humanitarian issues with regional organizations, in accordance with their respective           See also: ECOSOC Strengthening Coordination
      mandates, inter alia, through dialogue;                                                                    E/2004/50, op5


78.   Urges the international community and the relevant organizations of the United Nations system, in this   E/2004/50, op8
                                                                                                               ECOSOC Strengthening Coordination
      regard, to strengthen humanitarian and other assistance to civilians under foreign occupation;           See also: ECOSOC Strengthening Coordination
                                                                                                                 E/2003/5, op4
                                                                                                                 E/2002/32, op24

79.   Calls for enhanced collaboration within the United Nations system and among various United               E/2004/50, op6
                                                                                                               ECOSOC Strengthening Coordination
      Nations bodies, including the General Assembly and the Economic and Social Council, within their
      respective mandates, in the area of the protection of civilians in armed conflict;




                                                                                                               34 | REFERENCE GUIDE / 2015
5.    Internally Displaced Persons (IDPs)
REFERENCE                                                                                                             LEGISLATIVE DECISION

Overarching principles, policies and guidelines
80.   Welcomes Commission on Human Rights resolution 1997/39, in which the Commission encouraged the                  A/RES/52/130, op6 (1997)
                                                                                                                      Protection of and Assistance to IDPs
      representative of the Secretary-General to continue, on the basis of his compilation and analysis of legal
      norms, to develop a comprehensive framework for the protection of internally displaced persons, and
      takes note of his preparations for guiding principles to this end;
81.   Notes the development by the representative of the Secretary-General, on the basis of his compilation           A/RES/54/167, op6 (1999)
                                                                                                                      Protection of and Assistance to IDPs
      and analysis of legal norms, of a comprehensive framework for the protection of internally displaced
      persons, in particular the Guiding Principles on Internal Displacement;
82.   Notes with appreciation that the United Nations agencies, regional and non-governmental organizations           A/RES/54/167, op8 (1999)
                                                                                                                      Protection of and Assistance to IDPs
      are making use of the Guiding Principles in their work, and encourages the further dissemination and
      application of the Guiding Principles;
83.   Notes with appreciation that an increasing number of States, United Nations agencies and regional and           A/RES/56/164, op7 (2001)
                                                                                                                      Protection of and Assistance to IDPs
      non-governmental organizations are making use of the Guiding Principles, encourages the further dis-
      semination and application of the Guiding Principles, expresses its appreciation for the dissemination and
      promotion of the Guiding Principles at regional and other seminars on displacement, and encourages the
      Representative of the Secretary-General to continue to initiate or support such seminars in consultation with
      regional organizations, intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations and other relevant institu-
      tions, and to provide support for efforts to promote capacity-building and use of the Guiding Principles;


                                                                                                                      35 | REFERENCE GUIDE / 2015
84.   Notes with appreciation the increased attention paid to the issue of internally displaced persons in the          A/RES/68/180, op25 (2013)
                                                                                                                        Protection of and Assistance to IDPs
      consolidated inter-agency appeals process, and encourages further efforts to improve the integration of           See also: Protection of and Assistance to IDPs
      the protection and assistance needs of internally displaced persons in consolidated appeals;                        A/RES/66/165, op21 (2011)
                                                                                                                          A/RES/56/164, op11 (2001)
                                                                                                                          A/RES/64/162, op19 (2009)
                                                                                                                          A/RES/62/153, op19 (2007)
                                                                                                                          A/RES/60/168, op16 (2005)
                                                                                                                          A/RES/58/177, op15 (2003)

85.   Notes that an increasing number of States, United Nations organizations and regional and non-govern-              E/2014/13, op32
                                                                                                                        ECOSOC Strengthening Coordination
      mental organizations are making use of the Guiding Principles on Internal Displacement, encour-                   See also: ECOSOC Strengthening Coordination
      ages the strengthening of legal frameworks for the protection of internally displaced persons,                      E/2003/5, op9

      and urges the international community to strengthen its support to affected States in their efforts to pro-
      vide, through national plans or initiatives, protection and assistance to their internally displaced persons;
86.   Recognizes the Guiding Principles on Internal Displacement as an important international frame-                   A/RES/68/180, op17 (2013)
                                                                                                                        Protection of and Assistance to IDPs
      work for the protection of internally displaced persons, welcomes the fact that an increasing number              See also: Protection of and Assistance to IDPs
      of States, United Nations organizations and regional and non-governmental organizations are applying                A/RES/64/162, op10 (2009)
                                                                                                                          A/RES/62/153, op10 (2007)
      them as a standard, and encourages all relevant actors to make use of the Guiding Principles when deal-             A/RES/60/168, op8 (2005)
                                                                                                                          A/RES/58/177, op7 (2003)
      ing with situations of internal displacements;
87.   Recognizes the Guiding Principles on Internal Displacement as an important international frame-                   A/RES/69/135, op48 (2014)
                                                                                                                        Strengthening Coordination
      work for the protection of internally displaced persons, encourages Member States and humanitarian                See also: Strengthening Coordination
      agencies to continue to work together, in collaboration with host communities, in endeavours to provide           A/RES/68/102, op40 (2013)
                                                                                                                           A/RES/67/87, op36 (2012)
      a more predictable response to the needs of internally displaced persons, and in this regard calls for               A/RES/66/119, op32 (2011)
      continued and enhanced international support, upon request, for capacity-building efforts of States; and             A/RES/65/133, op26 (2010)
                                                                                                                                                    [cont]
                                                                                                          [continues]



                                                                                                                        36 | REFERENCE GUIDE / 2015
[cont]   encourages humanitarian organizations to improve coordination, including with development organiza-           [cont]
                                                                                                                          A/RES/64/76, op25 (2009)
         tions, to better address the needs of internally displaced persons in support of Member States to pro-           A/RES/63/139, op24 (2008)
                                                                                                                          A/RES/62/94, op23 (2007)
         mote durable solutions;                                                                                          A/RES/61/134, op23 (2006)
                                                                                                                          A/RES/60/124, op6 (2005)

88.      Also welcomes the adoption and entry into force of the African Union Convention for the Protection            A/RES/68/180, op9 (2013)
                                                                                                                       Protection of and Assistance to IDPs
         and Assistance of Internally Displaced Persons in Africa (Kampala Convention), which builds                   See also: Protection of and Assistance to IDPs
         on the Protocol on the Protection of and Assistance to Internally Displaced Persons and the                     A/RES/66/165, op6 (2011)

         Protocol on the Property Rights of Returning Persons adopted by the International Conference
         on the Great Lakes Region and which marks a significant step towards strengthening the national and
         regional normative framework for the protection of and assistance to internally displaced persons in
         Africa, encourages African States to consider signing and/or ratifying the Convention, and encourages
         other regional mechanisms to consider the development of their own regional normative frameworks for
         the protection of internally displaced persons;
89.      Recognizes that Member States have the primary responsibility to promote durable solutions                    A/RES/68/180, op10 (2013)
                                                                                                                       Protection of and Assistance to IDPs
         for their internally displaced persons, thus contributing to their national, economic and social devel-
         opment processes, and encourages the international community, the United Nations system, the Special
         Rapporteur, relevant international and regional organizations and donor countries to continue to support
         international, regional and national efforts to meet the needs of internally displaced persons on the basis
         of solidarity, the principles of international cooperation and the Guiding Principles on Internal Displace-
         ment and to ensure that humanitarian assistance, early recovery and development assistance efforts are
         appropriately funded;




                                                                                                                       37 | REFERENCE GUIDE / 2015
Dispositions addressed to Member States
90.   Encourages Member States with internally displaced persons to develop or strengthen, as appro-                     A/RES/59/141, op16 (2004)
                                                                                                                         Strengthening Coordination
      priate, national laws, policies and minimum standards on internal displacement, inter alia,                        See also: Strengthening Coordination
      taking into account the Guiding Principles on Internal Displacement, and to continue to work with human-             A/RES/58/114, op11 (2003)
                                                                                                                         ECOSOC Strengthening Coordination
      itarian agencies in endeavours to provide a more predictable response to the needs of internally dis-                E/2004/50, op39
      placed persons, and in this regard calls for international support, upon request, to the capacity-building
      efforts of Governments;
91.   Calls upon Governments to provide protection and assistance, including reintegration and development               A/RES/68/180, op21 (2013)
                                                                                                                         Protection of and Assistance to IDPs
      assistance, to internally displaced persons and to facilitate the efforts of the relevant United Nations           See also: Protection of and Assistance to IDPs
      agencies and humanitarian organizations in these respects by further improving the access of humani-                 A/RES/66/165, op18 (2011)
                                                                                                                           A/RES/64/162, op16 (2009)
      tarian personnel and the delivery of supplies and equipment to internally displaced persons and by main-             A/RES/62/153, op15 (2007)
                                                                                                                           A/RES/60/168, op12 (2005)
      taining the civilian and humanitarian character of camps and settlements for internally displaced persons            A/RES/58/177, op11 (2003)
      where they exist, as well as by taking the steps necessary to ensure the safety and security of humanitar-           A/RES/56/164, op10 (2001)

      ian personnel so that they may efficiently perform their task of assisting internally displaced persons;
92.   Calls upon States to provide durable solutions, including within their national development plans,                 A/RES/68/180, op5 (2013)
                                                                                                                         Protection of and Assistance to IDPs
      and encourages strengthened international cooperation, in particular between humanitarian and develop-             See also: Protection of and Assistance to IDPs
      ment actors, including through the provision of resources and expertise to assist affected countries, in par-        A/RES/66/165, op5 (2011)

      ticular developing countries, in their national efforts and policies related to assistance, protection and reha-
      bilitation for internally displaced persons and the integration of the human rights and needs of internally
      displaced persons into both rural and urban development strategies, as well as the participation of both
      internally displaced persons and host communities in the design and implementation of those strategies;



                                                                                                                         38 | REFERENCE GUIDE / 2015
93.   Expresses particular concern that many internally displaced children, particularly girls, lack                 A/RES/68/180, op6 (2013)
                                                                                                                     Protection of and Assistance to IDPs
      access to education in all phases of displacement owing to attacks against schools, dam-
      aged or destroyed school buildings, insecurity, loss of documentation, language barriers and
      discrimination, and calls upon States, in cooperation with all other relevant actors, including humani-
      tarian and development agencies and donors, to ensure the right to a quality education, including primary
      and secondary education, for internally displaced children, without discrimination of any kind, as well as
      to support existing schools to enable them to include internally displaced persons, and calls upon par-
      ties to armed conflict to respect the civilian character of schools and other educational institutions and
      to refrain from undertaking actions that could adversely affect the protection of these buildings against
      direct attacks;
94.   Calls upon all States and parties in complex humanitarian emergencies, in particular in armed conflict         A/RES/69/135, op49 (2014)
                                                                                                                     Strengthening Coordination
      and in post-conflict situations, in countries in which humanitarian personnel are operating, in conformity
      with the relevant provisions of international law and national laws, to cooperate fully with the United
      Nations and other humanitarian agencies and organizations and to ensure the safe and unhindered
      access of humanitarian personnel, as well as the delivery of supplies and equipment, in order to allow
      such personnel to efficiently perform their task of assisting affected civilian populations, including refu-
      gees and internally displaced persons;
95.   Encourages Governments, members of the Inter-Agency Standing Committee, United Nations humani-                 A/RES/68/180, op28 (2013)
                                                                                                                     Protection of and Assistance to IDPs
      tarian coordinators and country teams to ensure the provision of reliable data on internal dis-                See also: Protection of and Assistance to IDPs
      placement situations, collaborating with the Internal Displacement Monitoring Centre, request-                   A/RES/66/165, op23 (2011)

      ing the support of the Joint Internally Displaced Person Profiling Service and providing financial
      resources, as appropriate in these respects;


                                                                                                                     39 | REFERENCE GUIDE / 2015
Dispositions addressed to the United Nations and/or the humanitarian system in general
96.   The Council acknowledges the specific needs of internally displaced persons in the transition from             E/1999/1, op23
                                                                                                                     ECOSOC Strengthening Coordination
      conflict to peace. The Council calls on all States to apply internationally recognized norms with regard
      to internally displaced persons. It also calls for further strengthening and coordinating of international
      efforts for those persons in this regard. The Council takes note of the fact that IASC is using the Guiding
      Principles on Internal Displacement. The Council welcomes the efforts of the Representative of the
      Secretary-General for internally displaced persons, the Emergency Relief Coordinator and the members
      of IASC;
97.   Encourages the Special Rapporteur, through continuous dialogue with Governments and all intergovern-           A/RES/69/180, op3 (2013)
                                                                                                                     Protection of and Assistance to IDPs
      mental and non-governmental organizations concerned, to continue his analysis of the root causes of
                                                                                                                     See also: Protection of and Assistance to IDPs
      internal displacement and of the needs and human rights of those displaced, measures of prevention,              A/RES/54/167, op11 (1999)
      including early warning, and ways to strengthen protection and assistance, as well as dura-
      ble solutions for internally displaced persons, and, in the latter regard, to use in his activities the
      Framework on Durable Solutions for Internally Displaced Persons of the Inter-Agency Stand-
      ing Committee, and also encourages the Special Rapporteur to continue to promote comprehensive
      strategies, taking into account the primary responsibility of States for the protection of and assistance to
      internally displaced persons within their jurisdiction;
98.   Notes with appreciation the establishment of the non-operational inter- agency Unit on Internal                E/2002/32, op28
                                                                                                                     ECOSOC Strengthening Coordination
      Displacement in the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, and encourages Mem-
      ber States and relevant agencies to provide it with the necessary resources to enable it to carry out its
      activities;



                                                                                                                     40 | REFERENCE GUIDE / 2015
99.   Encourages all relevant United Nations organizations and humanitarian assistance, human rights and        A/RES/68/180, op23 (2013)
                                                                                                                Protection of and Assistance to IDPs
      development organizations to enhance their collaboration and coordination through the Inter-Agency        See also: Protection of and Assistance to IDPs
      Standing Committee and United Nations country teams in countries with situations of internal                A/RES/64/162, op18 (2009)
                                                                                                                  A/RES/62/153, op18 (2007)
      displacement and to provide all possible assistance and support to the Special Rapporteur, and              A/RES/60/168, op15 (2005)
                                                                                                                  A/RES/58/177, op14 (2003)
      requests the continued participation of the Special Rapporteur in the work of the Inter-Agency Standing     A/RES/56/164, op12 (2001)
      Committee and its subsidiary bodies;
100. Recognizes the need to collect reliable disaggregated data, including data disaggregated by age and        A/RES/68/180. Op27 (2013)
                                                                                                                Protection of and Assistance to IDPs
     sex, on internally displaced persons in order to improve policy, programming and response to internal      See also: Protection of and Assistance to IDPs
     displacement and, in this respect, the relevance of the inter-agency Joint Internally Displaced Person       A/RES/64/162, op21 (2009)
                                                                                                                  A/RES/62/153, op20 (2007)
     Profiling Service and the global database on internally displaced persons maintained by the Internal         A/RES/60/168, op17 (2005)
                                                                                                                  A/RES/58/177, op16 (2003)
     Displacement Monitoring Centre;
Dispositions addressed to specific actors
101. The Council notes with satisfaction the designation of the Emergency Relief Coordinator as the focal       E/1998/1, op11
                                                                                                                ECOSOC Strengthening Coordination
     point for inter-agency coordination of humanitarian assistance to internally displaced persons
     (IDPs), and also notes the adoption by IASC of the guiding principles on IDPs, and encourages the
     Emergency Relief Coordinator, in fulfilling this function, to work closely with all agencies and organi-
     zations involved, in particular with the Representative of the Secretary-General on IDPs, who
     will report to the Commission of Human Rights on his efforts and on the views expressed to him on
     these guiding principles;




                                                                                                                41 | REFERENCE GUIDE / 2015
102. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to provide the Special Rapporteur, from within existing           A/RES/68/180, op29 (2013)
                                                                                                                  Protection of and Assistance to IDPs
     resources, with all assistance necessary to carry out his mandate effectively, and encourages the Office
     of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights, in close cooperation with the Emergency
     Relief Coordinator, the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs of the Secretariat, the Office
     of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and all other relevant United Nations offices and
     agencies, to continue to support the Special Rapporteur;
103. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to provide the Special Rapporteur, from within existing           A/RES/68/180, op29 (2013)
                                                                                                                  Protection of and Assistance to IDPs
     resources, with all assistance necessary to carry out his mandate effectively, and encourages the Office     See also: Protection of and Assistance to IDPs
     of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights, in close cooperation with the Emergency              A/RES/60/168, op19 (2005)
                                                                                                                    A/RES/58/177, op18 (2003)
     Relief Coordinator, the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs of the Secretariat, the Office     A/RES/56/164, op15 (2001)
                                                                                                                    A/RES/54/167, op13 (1999)
     of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and all other relevant United Nations offices and         A/RES/52/130, op11 (1997)
     agencies, to continue to support the Special Rapporteur;                                                       A/RES/50/195, op13 (1995)


104. Emphasizes the central role of the Emergency Relief Coordinator for the inter-agency coordination of         A/RES/68/180, op22 (2013)
                                                                                                                  Protection of and Assistance to IDPs
     protection of and assistance to internally displaced persons, interalia, through the inter-agency            See also: Protection of and Assistance to IDPs
     cluster system, welcomes continued initiatives taken in order to ensure better protection, assistance          A/RES/64/162, op17 (2009)
                                                                                                                    A/RES/62/153, op16 (2007)
     and development strategies for internally displaced persons, as well as better coordination of activities      A/RES/60/168, op13 (2005)
                                                                                                                    A/RES/58/177, op12 (2003)
     regarding them, and emphasizes the need to strengthen the capacities of the United Nations organiza-           A/RES/56/164, op2 (2001)
     tions and other relevant actors to meet the immense humanitarian challenges of internal displacement;
105. Welcomes the initiatives undertaken by regional organizations, such as the African Union, the Interna-       A/RES/68/180, op8 (2013)
                                                                                                                  Protection of and Assistance to IDPs
     tional Conference on the Great Lakes Region, the Organization of American States and the Council of
     Europe, to address the protection, assistance and development needs of internally displaced persons
     and to find durable solutions for them, and encourages regional organizations to strengthen their
     activities and their cooperation with the Special Rapporteur;

                                                                                                                  42 | REFERENCE GUIDE / 2015
6.    Safety and Security of Humanitarian Personnel
REFERENCE                                                                                                        LEGISLATIVE DECISION

Overarching principles, policies and guidelines
106. Strongly condemns all forms of violence to which humanitarian personnel and United Nations                  A/RES/59/141, op17 (2004)
                                                                                                                 Strengthening Coordination
     and its associated personnel are increasingly subjected, as well as any act or failure to act, con-         See also: Strengthening Coordination
     trary to international law that obstructs or prevents humanitarian personnel and United Nations and its       A/RES/58/114, op7 (2003)
                                                                                                                 ECOSOC Strengthening Coordination
     associated personnel from discharging their humanitarian functions;                                           E/2003/5, op6

107. Stresses the importance of ensuring that humanitarian personnel and United Nations and associated           A/RES/69/133,, op14 (2014)
                                                                                                                 Safety and Security
     personnel are aware and respectful of national and local customs and traditions in their coun-              See also: Safety and Security
     tries of assignment and communicate clearly their purpose and objectives to local populations in order        A/RES/68/101, op20 (2013)
                                                                                                                   A/RES/67/85, op19 (2012)
     to enhance their acceptance, thereby contributing to their safety and security, and in this regard ensure     A/RES/66/117, op18 (2011)
                                                                                                                   A/RES/65/132, op18 (2010)
     that humanitarian action is guided by humanitarian principles;                                                A/RES/64/77, op17 (2009)
                                                                                                                   A/RES/63/138, op15 (2008)
                                                                                                                   A/RES/61/133, op15 (2006)
                                                                                                                   A/RES/60/123, op13 (2005)
                                                                                                                   A/RES/59/211, op20 (2004)
                                                                                                                 ECOSOC Strengthening Coordination
                                                                                                                   E/2004/50, op14

108. Reaffirms the obligation of all humanitarian personnel and United Nations and associated personnel to       A/RES/69/133, op19 (2014)
                                                                                                                 Safety and Security
     respect and, where required, observe the national laws of the country in which they are operat-             See also: Safety and Security
     ing, in accordance with international law and the Charter of the United Nations;                              A/RES/68/101, op19 (2013)
                                                                                                                   A/RES/67/85, op18 ( 2012)
                                                                                                                   A/RES/66/117, op17 (2011)
                                                                                                                                            [cont]



                                                                                                                 43 | REFERENCE GUIDE / 2015
                                                                                                                [cont]
                                                                                                                   A/RES/65/132, op17 (2010)
                                                                                                                   A/RES/64/77, op16 (2009)
                                                                                                                   A/RES/63/138, op16 (2008)
                                                                                                                   A/RES/62/95, op14 (2007)
                                                                                                                   A/RES/61/133, op14 (2006)
                                                                                                                   A/RES/60/123, op12 (2005)
                                                                                                                   A/RES/59/211, op13 (2004)
                                                                                                                   A/RES/58/122, op13 (2003)
                                                                                                                   A/RES/57/155, op15 (2002)
                                                                                                                   A/RES/56/217, op15 (2001)
                                                                                                                   A/RES/55/175, op11 (2000)
                                                                                                                   A/RES/54/192, op9 (1999)
                                                                                                                   A/RES/53/87, op13 (1998)
                                                                                                                   A/RES/52/167, op5 (1997)

109. Also underlines the need for better coordination between the United Nations and host Governments, in       A/RES/69/133, op38 (2014)
                                                                                                                Safety and Security
     accordance with the relevant provisions of international law and national laws, on the use and deploy-     See also: Safety and Security
     ment of essential equipment required to provide for the safety and security of United Nations                A/RES/68/101, op38 (2013)
                                                                                                                  A/RES/67/85, op36 (2012)
     personnel and associated personnel working in the delivery of humanitarian assistance by                     A/RES/66/117, op35 (2011)
                                                                                                                  A/RES/65/132, op18 (2010)
     United Nations organizations;
110. Strongly condemns all threats and acts of violence against humanitarian personnel and United Nations       A/RES/69/133, op11 (2014)
                                                                                                                Safety and Security
     and associated personnel, and also condemns attacks intentionally directed against personnel               See also: Safety and Security
     involved in a peacekeeping mission in accordance with the Charter as long as they are entitled to            A/RES/64/77, op17 (2009)
                                                                                                                  A/RES/63/138, op15 (2008)
     protection from attack under international humanitarian law, reaffirms the need to prosecute, penalise       A/RES/61/133, op15 (2006)
                                                                                                                  A/RES/60/123, op13 (2005)
     and punish those responsible for such acts, and strongly urges all States to take stronger action to         A/RES/59/211, op20 (2004)
     ensure that crimes against such personnel do not remain unpunished and are investigated fully, affirm-
     ing the need for States to ensure that perpetrators of any such acts committed on their territory do not
     operate with impunity, as provided by national laws and obligations under international law;



                                                                                                                44 | REFERENCE GUIDE / 2015
Dispositions addressed to Member States
111. The Council reaffirms General Assembly resolution 52/167 of 16 December 1997 on the safety and                   E/1998/1, op7
                                                                                                                      ECOSOC Strengthening Coordination
     security of humanitarian personnel, in which the Assembly calls upon all Governments and parties
     in complex humanitarian emergencies, in particular armed conflicts and post-conflict situations, in coun-
     tries where humanitarian personnel are operating, in conformity with the relevant provisions of interna-
     tional law and national laws, to ensure the safe and unhindered access of humanitarian personnel in
     order to allow them to perform efficiently their task of assisting the affected civilian population, including
     refugees and internally displaced persons. The Council also reaffirms the necessity for all humanitarian
     personnel to respect the national laws of the countries in which they are operating;
112. Strongly urges all States to take the necessary measures to ensure the safety and security of humani-            A/RES/65/132, op3 (2010)
                                                                                                                      Safety and Security
     tarian personnel and United Nations and associated personnel and to respect and ensure respect                   See also: Safety and Security
     for the inviolability of United Nations premises, which are essential to the continuation and successful           A/RES/64/77, op3 (2009)
                                                                                                                        A/RES/63/138, op3 (2008)
     implementation of United Nations operations;                                                                       A/RES/62/95, op3 (2007)
                                                                                                                        A/RES/61/133, op3 (2006)
                                                                                                                        A/RES/60/123, op3 (2005)
                                                                                                                        A/RES/59/211, op3 (2004)
                                                                                                                        A/RES/58/122, op3 (2003)
                                                                                                                        A/RES/57/155, op3 (2002)
                                                                                                                        A/RES/56/217, op3 (2001)
                                                                                                                        A/RES/55/175, op3 (2000)
                                                                                                                        A/RES/54/192, op2 (1999)
                                                                                                                        A/RES/53/87, op3 (1998)




                                                                                                                      45 | REFERENCE GUIDE / 2015
113. Urges Member States to continue to take the steps necessary to ensure the safety and security                  E/2014/13, op33
                                                                                                                    ECOSOC Strengthening Coordination
     of humanitarian personnel, premises, facilities, equipment, vehicles and supplies operating                    See also: Strengthening Coordination
     within their borders, and on other territories under their effective control, recognizes the need for appro-     A/RES/58/114, op8 (2003)
                                                                                                                    ECOSOC Strengthening Coordination
     priate collaboration between humanitarian actors and relevant authorities of the affected State in mat-          E/2013/6,op28
     ters related to the safety and security of humanitarian personnel, requests the Secretary-General to             E/2012/3,op28
                                                                                                                      E/2011/8, op23
     expedite his efforts to enhance the safety and security of personnel involved in United Nations humani-          E/2010/1, op17
                                                                                                                      E/2009/3, op16
     tarian operations, and urges Member States to ensure that perpetrators of crimes committed on their              E/2008/36, op8
     territory or on other territories under their effective control against humanitarian personnel do not oper-      E/2004/50, op10, op11
                                                                                                                      E/2003/5, op5, op8
     ate with impunity and are brought to justice, as provided for by national laws and in accordance with
     obligations under international law;
114. Also reaffirms the obligations of all States and parties to an armed conflict, in accordance with inter-       A/RES/69/135, op45 (2014)
                                                                                                                    Strengthening Coordination
     national humanitarian law, to respect and protect humanitarian personnel, including medical                    See also: Strengthening Coordination
     personnel, facilities, transports and activities, which must not be attacked, and to ensure that                 A/RES/68/102, op37 (2013)

     the wounded and sick receive, to the fullest extent practicable and with the least possible delay, the
     medical care and attention required;
115. Calls upon all States and parties in complex humanitarian emergencies, in particular in armed conflict         A/RES/69/135, op49 (2014)
                                                                                                                    Strengthening Coordination
     and in post-conflict situations, in countries in which humanitarian personnel are operating, in conformity     See also: Strengthening Coordination
     with the relevant provisions of international law and national laws, to cooperate fully with the United        A/RES/68/102, op41 (2013)
                                                                                                                       A/RES/67/87, op37 (2012)
     Nations and other humanitarian agencies and organizations and to ensure the safe and unhindered                   A/RES/66/119, op33 (2011)
     access of humanitarian personnel, as well as the delivery of supplies and equipment, in order to allow
     such personnel to efficiently perform their task of assisting affected civilian populations, including refu-
     gees and internally displaced persons;



                                                                                                                    46 | REFERENCE GUIDE / 2015
116. Calls upon States to consider acceding to or ratifying the Tampere Convention on the Provision of                 A/RES/69/133, op39 (2014)
                                                                                                                       Safety and Security
     Telecommunication Resources for Disaster Mitigation and Relief Operations of 18 June 1998,                        See also: Safety and Security
     which entered into force on 8 January 2005, and urges them to facilitate and expedite, consistent with              A/RES/68/101, op39 (2013)
                                                                                                                         A/RES/67/85, op37 (2012)
     their national laws and international obligations applicable to them, the use of communications equipment           A/RES/66/117, op 36 (2011)
     in those and other relief operations, inter alia, by limiting and, whenever possible, expeditiously lifting the
     restrictions placed on the use of communications equipment by United Nations and associated personnel;
Dispositions addressed to the United Nations and/or the humanitarian system in general
117. Mindful of the ongoing efforts of the Secretary-General on measures to further improve the United                 E/2004/50, op12
                                                                                                                       ECOSOC Strengthening Coordination
     Nations security management system, stresses the importance of continued collaboration among
     all parts of the United Nations system on staff safety and security issues;
118. Encourages United Nations organizations and other humanitarian actors to address security risks                   E/2004/50, op13
                                                                                                                       ECOSOC Strengthening Coordination
     posed to humanitarian staff, inter alia by promoting accountability at all levels and by promoting and
     enhancing collaborative actions, in accordance with the relevant provisions of international humanitar-
     ian law and national laws, where applicable;
119. Also welcomes the ongoing efforts of the Secretary-General to further enhance the security manage-                A/RES/64/77, op21 (2009)
                                                                                                                       Safety and Security
     ment system of the United Nations, and in this regard invites the United Nations and, as appropriate,
                                                                                                                       See also: Safety and Security
     other humanitarian organizations, working closely with host States, to further strengthen the analysis of           A/RES/63/138, op25 (2008)
                                                                                                                         A/RES/62/95, op22 (2007)
     threats to their safety and security in order to manage security risks by facilitating informed decisions           A/RES/61/133, op23 (2006)
     on the maintenance of an effective presence in the field, inter alia, to fulfil their humanitarian mandate;         A/RES/60/123, op22 (2005)
                                                                                                                         A/RES/59/211, op24 (2004)
                                                                                                                         A/RES/58/122, op21 (2003)




                                                                                                                       47 | REFERENCE GUIDE / 2015
120. Welcomes the progress made towards further enhancing the security management system of the                A/RES/69/135, op50 (2014)
                                                                                                               Strengthening Coordination
     United Nations, and supports the approach taken by the Secretary-General to focus the efforts of the      See also: Strengthening Coordination
     security management system on enabling the United Nations system to “stay and deliver” its most criti-      A/RES/68/102, op42 (2013)
                                                                                                                 A/RES/67/87, op38 (2012)
     cal programmes even in high-risk environments by effectively managing the risks to which person-            A/RES/66/119, op34 (2011)
                                                                                                                 A/RES/65/133, op28 (2010)
     nel are exposed, including in the provision of humanitarian assistance, and to adapt quickly to changes
                                                                                                               Safety and Security
     in local security conditions;                                                                                A/RES/68/101, op39 (2013)
                                                                                                                  A/RES/67/85, op25 (2012)
                                                                                                                  A/RES/66/117, op26 (2011)
                                                                                                                  A/RES/65/132, op24 (2010)

121. Calls upon all relevant actors to make every effort to support in their public statements a favourable    A/RES/69/133, op31 (2014)
                                                                                                               Safety and Security
     environment for the safety and security of humanitarian personnel and United Nations and associ-          See also: Safety and Security
     ated personnel;                                                                                             A/RES/68/101, op30 (2013)
                                                                                                                 A/RES/67/85, op28 (2012)
                                                                                                                 A/RES/66/117, op 27 (2011)
                                                                                                                 A/RES/64/77, op23 (2009)
                                                                                                                 A/RES/63/138, op27 (2008)

122. Encourages the United Nations, and other relevant humanitarian actors, to include as part of their        A/RES/69/135, op51 (2014)
                                                                                                               Strengthening Coordination
     risk management strategy the building of good relations and trust with national and local gov-            See also: Strengthening Coordination
     ernments, and to promote acceptance by local communities and all relevant actors, in order to               A/RES/68/102, op43 (2013)
                                                                                                                 A/RES/67/87, op39 (2012)
     enable humanitarian assistance to be provided, in accordance with humanitarian principles;                  A/RES/66/119, op (2011)
                                                                                                               ECOSOC Strengthening Coordination
                                                                                                                 E/2014/13, op35
                                                                                                                 E/2013/6, op 29
                                                                                                                 E/2012/3, op29
                                                                                                                 E/2011/8, op24




                                                                                                               48 | REFERENCE GUIDE / 2015
Dispositions addressed to specific actors
123. Requests the Department of Safety and Security of the Secretariat to further strengthen the security            A/RES/69/133, op34 (2014)
                                                                                                                     Safety and Security
     management of the United Nations, focusing on strengthening security risk management policy                     See also: Safety and Security
     and tools as well as their application, increasing situational awareness and analysis capac-                      A/RES/68/101, op33 (2013)
                                                                                                                       A/RES/67/85, op31 (2012)
     ity, strengthening policy development and promoting best practices, increasing compliance with                    A/RES/66/117, op30 (2011)
                                                                                                                       A/RES/65/132, op29 (2010)
     minimum operating security standards and improving monitoring and evaluation, enhancing surge capac-              A/RES/64/77, op26 (2009)
     ity for emergency response, devising effective physical security measures, developing the expertise of
     security professionals and strengthening support to the designated officials and the security manage-
     ment teams in the field, and promoting an effective and preventive security management approach that
     is multidimensional;
124. Welcomes the steps taken by the Secretary-General thus far and encourages further efforts to enhance            A/RES/69/133., op37 (2014)
                                                                                                                     Safety and Security
     coordination and cooperation, at both the headquarters and the field levels, between the United Nations         See also: Safety and Security
     and other humanitarian and non-governmental organizations on matters relating to the safety and secu-             A/RES/68/101, op33 (2013)
                                                                                                                       A/RES/67/85, op34 (2012)
     rity of humanitarian personnel and United Nations and associated personnel, with a view to addressing             A/RES/66/117, op33 (2011)
                                                                                                                       A/RES/65/132, op32 (2010)
     mutual security concerns in the field, based on the “Saving Lives Together” framework as well as                  A/RES/64/77, op29 (2009)
     other relevant national and local initiatives in this regard and in this respect, requests the Secretary Gen-     A/RES/63/138, op30 (2008)

     eral to encourage further collaborative initiatives to address the security needs of implementing partners
     including through enhanced information sharing and where appropriate training, invites Member States
     to consider increasing support to those initiatives, and requests the Secretary-General to report on steps
     taken in this regard;




                                                                                                                     49 | REFERENCE GUIDE / 2015
7.    Humanitarian Civil-Military Relations
REFERENCE                                                                                                       LEGISLATIVE DECISION

Overarching principles, policies and guidelines
125. Recalls the 2003 “Guidelines on the Use of Military and Civil Defence Assets to Support United             A/RES/59/141, op12 (2004)
                                                                                                                Strengthening Coordination
     Nations Humanitarian Activities in Complex Emergencies”, as well as the 1994 “Guidelines on                See also: Strengthening Coordination
     the Use of Military and Civil Defence Assets in Disaster Relief”, and stresses the value of their            A/RES/58/114, op9 (2003)
                                                                                                                ECOSOC Strengthening Coordination
     use and of the development by the United Nations in consultation with States and other relevant actors       E/2008/36, op12
     of further guidance on civil-military relations in the context of humanitarian activities and transition     E/2006/5, op13
                                                                                                                  E/2004/50, op21
     situations;
126. Emphasizes the fundamentally civilian character of humanitarian assistance, and in situations              E/2014/13, op36
                                                                                                                ECOSOC Strengthening Coordination
     where military capacity and assets are used to support the implementation of humanitarian assis-           See also: Strengthening Coordination
     tance reaffirms the need for their use to be undertaken with the consent of the affected State and in        A/RES/62/94, op6 (2007)
                                                                                                                  A/RES/61/134, op5 (2006)
     conformity with international law, including international humanitarian law, as well as humanitarian         A/RES/60/124, op7 (2005)
                                                                                                                  A/RES/59/141, op11 (2004)
     principles;
                                                                                                                ECOSOC Strengthening Coordination
                                                                                                                  E/2013/6, op 30
                                                                                                                  E/2012/3, op 30
                                                                                                                  E/2011/8, op25
                                                                                                                  E/2010/1, op19
                                                                                                                  E/2009/3, op18
                                                                                                                  E/2008/36, op11
                                                                                                                  E/2004/50, op19
                                                                                                                  E/2003/5, op21
                                                                                                                Cooperation in natural disasters
                                                                                                                  A/RES/62/92, op15 (2007)




                                                                                                                50 | REFERENCE GUIDE / 2015
127. Emphasizes the fundamentally civilian character of humanitarian assistance, and reaffirms the                 A/RES/65/307, op2 (2011)
                                                                                                                   Military and Civil Defence Assets
     need in situations of natural disaster in which military capacity and assets are used to support the imple-
     mentation of humanitarian assistance, for such use to be undertaken with the consent of the affected
     State and in conformity with international law, including international humanitarian law, as well as
     humanitarian principles;
128. Recalls in this regard the revised guidelines on the use of military and civil defence assets in disaster     A/RES/65/307, op3 (2011)
                                                                                                                   Military and Civil Defence Assets
     relief, and stresses the value of their use and of the development by the United Nations, in consultation
     with States and other relevant actors, of further guidance on civil-military relations in the context of
     humanitarian activities;
Dispositions addressed to Member States
129. Takes note with appreciation of the initiative of Qatar, the Dominican Republic and Turkey, to reflect, in    A/RES/65/307, op4 (2011)
                                                                                                                   Military and Civil Defence Assets
     close coordination with the Emergency Relief Coordinator, on improving the effectiveness and coor-
     dination of military and civil defence assets for natural disaster response;
130. Also takes note with appreciation of the initiative by Qatar, Hopefor, which aims to improve humanitar-       A/RES/65/307, op5 (2011)
                                                                                                                   Military and Civil Defence Assets
     ian civil-military coordination and ensure that the use of military and civil defence assets in support of
     natural disaster relief operations is undertaken in an appropriate, effective and coordinated manner, in
     accordance with the principles contained in paragraph 2 of the present resolution, and as the last resort
     as defined in the Oslo Guidelines;




                                                                                                                   51 | REFERENCE GUIDE / 2015
Dispositions addressed to the United Nations and/or the humanitarian system in general
131. Encourages Governments, the United Nations system and humanitarian organizations to share experi-              E/2002/32, op27
                                                                                                                    ECOSOC Strengthening Coordination
     ences and lessons they may have learned with regard to the development of criteria and procedures
     for the identification of armed elements and their separation from the civilian population
     in situations of complex emergencies, and urges Governments and relevant United Nations bodies to
     strengthen measures in this regard;
132. Encourages United Nations humanitarian organizations and other relevant United Nations entities to             E/2004/50, op20
                                                                                                                    ECOSOC Strengthening Coordination
     carry out jointly an in-depth examination of the extent to which current developments in inter-
     national peace and security have affected the understanding and acceptance of the United
     Nations humanitarian organizations by local populations, as well as the understanding and accept-
     ance of other humanitarian organizations, and the ability of humanitarian organizations to operate in the
     context of an international military presence, and to provide advice to these organizations on how they
     may respond better to these new developments;
Dispositions addressed to specific actors
133. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to develop more systematic links with Member States                 A/RES/61/134, op6 (2007)
                                                                                                                    Strengthening Coordination
     offering military assets for natural disaster response in order to identify the availability of such assets;   See also: ECOSOC Strengthening Coordination
                                                                                                                      E/2006/5, op12
                                                                                                                      E/2005/4, op11
                                                                                                                    Cooperation in Natural Disasters
                                                                                                                      A/RES/61/131, op12 (2006)
                                                                                                                      A/RES/60/125, op13 (2005)




                                                                                                                    52 | REFERENCE GUIDE / 2015
134. Recalls the request made by the Economic and Social Council in paragraph 12 of its resolution 2007/3 of   A/RES/62/94, op7 (2007)
                                                                                                               Strengthening Coordination
     17 July 2007 that the Secretary-General review and report on, in consultation with Member States, the     See also: ECOSOC Strengthening Coordination
     use of military assets for disaster relief, with the aim of improving the predictability and use            E/2007/3, op12
                                                                                                               Cooperation in Natural Disasters
     of these assets, based on humanitarian principles;                                                          A/RES/62/92, op15 (2007)

135. Encourages the United Nations Secretariat, in strengthening the coordination of humanitarian work and     E/2004/50, op18
                                                                                                               ECOSOC Strengthening Coordination
     assistance, to engage in a dialogue with States and United Nations humanitarian entities to clarify the
     respective roles of and complementarity among relevant entities of the United Nations oper-
     ating in the framework of United Nations multidimensional missions, invites the Secretariat to
     consult with relevant humanitarian organizations in that regard and requests the Secretary-General to
     report thereon to the General Assembly, through the Economic and Social Council;
136. Recommends to the General Assembly that it request the Secretary-General to ensure that United            E/2005/4, op19
                                                                                                               ECOSOC Strengthening Coordination
     Nations humanitarian organizations work, as appropriate, with the Department of Peacekeeping Opera-
     tions of the Secretariat in order to better ensure that humanitarian issues are accounted for from the
     earliest stages of planning and design of United Nations multidimensional integrated peacekeep-
     ing operations with humanitarian components and that the mandates of such operations continue
     to respect the need for their humanitarian activities to be carried out in accordance with humanitarian
     principles;




                                                                                                               53 | REFERENCE GUIDE / 2015
                                II.   LINKAGE BETWEEN
                                      EMERGENCY ASSISTANCE,
                                      DISASTER RISK REDUCTION AND TRANSITION




54   | REFERENCE GUIDE / 2015
8.    Prevention, Preparedness, Disaster Risk Reduction and Capacity-Building
REFERENCE                                                                                                      LEGISLATIVE DECISION

I.   PREVENTION, PREPAREDNESS, INCLUDING EARLY WARNING

Overarching principles, policies and guidelines

137. Special attention should be given to disaster prevention and preparedness by the Governments              A/RES/46/182, op8 (1991)
                                                                                                               Strengthening Coordination
     concerned, as well as by the international community;

138. Economic growth and sustainable development are essential for prevention of and prepar-                   A/RES/46/182, op10 (1991)
                                                                                                               Strengthening Coordination
     edness against natural disasters and other emergencies […];

139. Stresses the need to strengthen efforts at all levels, including at the domestic level, to                A/RES/55/163, op6 (2000)
                                                                                                               Cooperation in Natural Disasters
     improve natural disaster awareness, prevention, preparedness and mitigation, including                    See also: Cooperation in Natural Disasters
     early warning systems, as well as international cooperation in response to emergencies, from relief         A/RES/54/233, op4 (1999)

     to rehabilitation, reconstruction and development, bearing in mind the overall negative impact of natu-
     ral disasters, the resulting humanitarian need and requests from affected countries, as appropriate;

140. Stresses the need for partnership among Governments of the affected countries, relevant humanitarian      A/RES/56/103, op9 (2001)
                                                                                                               Cooperation in Natural Disasters
     organizations and specialized companies to promote training in, access to and use of technolo-            See also: Cooperation in Natural Disasters
     gies to strengthen preparedness for and response to natural disasters, and to enhance the                   A/RES/55/163, op13 (2000)

     transfer of current technologies and corresponding know-how, in particular to developing
     countries, on concessional and preferential terms, as mutually agreed;



                                                                                                               55 | REFERENCE GUIDE / 2015
141. Stresses the need to promote the access to and transfer of technology and knowledge related             A/RES/59/212, op12 (2004)
                                                                                                             Cooperation in Natural Disasters
     to early warning systems and to mitigation programmes to developing countries affected by               See also: Cooperation in Natural Disasters
     natural disasters;                                                                                        A/RES/58/25, op11 (2003)
                                                                                                               A/RES/57/152, op10 (2002)


142. Emphasizes the need to mobilize adequate, flexible and sustainable resources for recovery,              A/RES/65/264, op34 (2010)
                                                                                                             Cooperation in Natural Disasters
     preparedness and disaster risk reduction activities in order to ensure predictable and timely           See also: Cooperation in Natural Disasters
     access to resources for humanitarian assistance in emergencies resulting from disasters associated        A/RES/63/141, op24 (2008)

     with natural hazards;

Dispositions addressed to Member States

143. Early-warning information should be made available in an unrestricted and timely manner to all inter-   A/RES/46/182, op20 (1991)
                                                                                                             Strengthening Coordination
     ested Governments and concerned authorities, in particular of affected or disaster-prone countries.
     The capacity of disaster-prone countries to receive, use and disseminate this information should be
     strengthened. In this connection, the international community is urged to assist these countries upon
     request with the establishment and enhancement of national early-warning systems;

144. Encourages enhanced cooperation among Governments, in particular through the United Nations             A/RES/55/163, op9 (2000)
                                                                                                             Cooperation in Natural Disasters
     and regional organizations, in order to strengthen early warning and preparedness mechanisms
     for natural disasters;

145. Encourages Governments in natural-disaster-prone countries to establish, with the support of            A/RES/55/163, op18 (2000)
                                                                                                             Cooperation in Natural Disasters
     the international community, in particular the donors, national spatial information infrastructures
     relating to natural disaster preparedness, early warning, response and mitigation, including
     the necessary training of personnel;


                                                                                                             56 | REFERENCE GUIDE / 2015
146. Stresses the need for partnerships among Governments, organizations of the United Nations              A/RES/59/212, op10 (2004)
                                                                                                            Cooperation in Natural Disasters
     system, relevant humanitarian organizations and specialized companies to promote training to           See also:
     strengthen preparedness for and response to natural disasters;                                           A/RES/58/25, op10 (2003)
                                                                                                              A/RES/57/152, op9 (2002)


147. Encourages the international community, including relevant United Nations organizations and the        A/RES/69/135, op21 (2014)
                                                                                                            Strengthening Coordination
     International Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies, to support efforts of Member         See also: Strengthening Coordination
     States aimed at strengthening their capacity to prepare for and respond to disasters and to              A/RES/68/102, op19 (2013)
                                                                                                              A/RES/67/87, op16 (2012)
     support efforts, as appropriate, to strengthen systems for identifying and monitoring disaster risk,     A/RES/66/119, op12 (2011)
                                                                                                              A/RES/65/133, op10 (2010)
     including vulnerability and natural hazards;                                                           ECOSOC Strengthening Coordination
                                                                                                              E/2011/8, op5


148. Welcomes the initiatives at the regional and national levels related to the implementation of the      A/RES/65/133, op11 (2010)
                                                                                                            Strengthening Coordination
     Guidelines for the Domestic Facilitation and Regulation of International Disaster Relief and           See also: Strengthening Coordination
     Initial Recovery Assistance, adopted at the Thirtieth International Conference of the Red Cross and      A/RES/64/76, op10 (2009)
                                                                                                            See also: Cooperation in Natural Disasters
     Red Crescent, held in Geneva from 26-30 November 2007, and encourages Member States and, where           A/RES/65/264, op7 (2011)
     applicable, regional organizations, to take further steps to strengthen operational and legal frame-     A/RES/64/251, op7 (2010)
                                                                                                              A/RES/63/141, op5 (2008)
     works for international disaster relief, taking into account the Guidelines, as appropriate;           See also: ECOSOC Strengthening Coordination
                                                                                                              E/2011/8, op6
                                                                                                              E/2010/1, op5
                                                                                                              E/2009/3, op5
                                                                                                              E/2008/36, op5




                                                                                                            57 | REFERENCE GUIDE / 2015
149. Urges Member States to develop, update and strengthen early warning systems, disaster pre-               A/RES/69/263, op11 (2014)
                                                                                                              Cooperation in Natural Disasters
     paredness and risk reduction measures at all levels, in accordance with the Hyogo Framework              See also: Cooperation in Natural Disasters
     for Action, taking into account their own circumstances and capacities and in coordination with rel-       A/RES/68/103, op11 (2013)
                                                                                                                A/RES/67/231, op10 (2012)
     evant actors, as appropriate, and encourages the international community and relevant United Nations       A/RES/66/277, op10 (2011)
                                                                                                                A/RES/65/264, op10 (2010)
     entities to continue to support national efforts in this regard;                                           A/RES/64/251, op10 (2009)
                                                                                                                A/RES/63/141, op8 (2008)

150. Also urges Member States to improve their response to early warning information in order to ensure       A/RES/69/263, op10 (2014)
                                                                                                              Cooperation in Natural Disasters
     that early warning leads to early action, and encourages all stakeholders to support the efforts of      See also: Cooperation in Natural Disasters
     Member States in this regard;                                                                              A/RES/68/103, op10 (2013)
                                                                                                                A/RES/67/231, op11 (2012)
                                                                                                                A/RES/66/277, op11 (2011)

151. Urges Member States, the United Nations system and other humanitarian actors to consider the             A/RES/69/263, op24 (2014)
                                                                                                              Cooperation in Natural Disasters
     specific and differentiated consequences of natural disasters both in rural and urban areas,             See also: Cooperation in Natural Disasters
     when designing and implementing disaster risk reduction, preparedness, humanitarian assis-                 A/RES/68/103, op23 (2013)
                                                                                                                A/RES/67/231, op20 (2012)
     tance and early recovery strategies, giving special emphasis to addressing the needs of those              A/RES/66/277, op19 (2011)
                                                                                                                A/RES/64/251, op18 (2010)
     living in rural and urban poor areas prone to natural disasters;
152. Encourages the further use of space-based and ground-based remote-sensing technologies,                  A/RES/69/263 op27 (2014)
                                                                                                              Cooperation in Natural Disasters
     including as provided by the United Nations Platform for Space-based Information for Disaster            See also: Cooperation in Natural Disasters
     Management and Emergency Response (UN-SPIDER), as well as the sharing of geographi-                        A/RES/64/251, op21 (2010)
                                                                                                                A/RES/63/141, op17 (2008)
     cal data, for the prevention, mitigation and management of natural disasters, where appropri-              A/RES/62/92, op14 (2007)
                                                                                                                A/RES/61/131, op17 (2006)
     ate, and invites Member States to continue to provide their support to the consolidation of the United     A/RES/60/125, op16 (2005)
     Nations capability in the area of satellite-derived geographical information for early warning, pre-       A/RES/59/212, op13, op14 (2004)
                                                                                                                A/RES/58/25, op12, op13 (2003)
     paredness, response and early recovery;                                                                    A/RES/57/152, op11, op12 (2002)
                                                                                                                A/RES/56/103, op10 and 11 (2001)
                                                                                                                A/RES/55/163, op14 and 15 (2000)
                                                                                                                A/RES/54/233, pp8 (1999)


                                                                                                              58 | REFERENCE GUIDE / 2015
153. Reaffirms the importance of implementing the Hyogo Framework for Action 2005–2015: Building               A/RES/69/135, op15 (2014)
                                                                                                               Strengthening Coordination
     the Resilience of Nations and Communities to Disasters, reiterates the importance of strength-            See also: Strengthening Coordination
     ening the effectiveness of national and local preparedness in line with priority five of the Framework,     A/RES/68/102, op13 (2013)
                                                                                                                 A/RES/67/87, op12 (2012)
     notes the fourth session of the Global Platform for Disaster Risk Reduction, held in Geneva from 19         A/RES/66/119, op8 (2011)

     to 23 May 2013, and encourages States, the United Nations system and all stakeholders to continue         ECOSOC Strengthening Coordination
                                                                                                                 E/2013/6, op3
     to engage in the consultations on the successor to the Framework, culminating at the Third World            E/2011/8, op3

     Conference on Disaster Risk Reduction, to be held in Sendai, Japan, from 14 to 18 March 2015;

154. Encourages Member States, the private sector, civil society and other relevant entities to make new       E/2014/13, op37
                                                                                                               ECOSOC Strengthening Coordination
     contributions and to consider increasing and diversifying their existing contributions to humanitarian    See also: ECOSOC Strengthening Coordination
     funding mechanisms, including consolidated and flash appeals, the Central Emergency Response Fund           E/2013/6, op33
                                                                                                                 E/2012/3, op33
     and other funds such as the country-based pooled funds, based on and in proportion to assessed              E/2011/8, op29

     needs, as a means of ensuring flexible, predictable, timely, needs-based and, where possi-
     ble, multi-year, non-earmarked and additional resources to meet global humanitarian chal-
     lenges, encourages donors to adhere to the Principles and Good Practice of Humanitarian
     Donorship, reiterates that contributions for humanitarian assistance should be provided in a way
     which is not to the detriment of resources made available for international cooperation for develop-
     ment, recognizes the need for more diversified funding bases, and encourages the United Nations
     and humanitarian organizations to consider making further use of multi-year consolidated appeals, as
     appropriate;




                                                                                                               59 | REFERENCE GUIDE / 2015
155. Encourages Member States to take steps to develop or to improve data collection and analysis                A/RES/69/263 op32 (2014)
                                                                                                                 Cooperation in Natural Disasters
     and to facilitate the exchange of information with humanitarian organizations of the United                 See also: Cooperation in Natural Disasters
     Nations, in order to support preparedness efforts and to improve the effectiveness of a needs-based           A/RES/68/103, op10 (2013)
                                                                                                                   A/RES/68/103, op31 (2013)
     humanitarian response, and encourages the United Nations system, as appropriate, and other relevant           A/RES/67/231, op28 (2012)
     actors to continue to assist developing countries in their efforts to build local and national capacities   ECOSOC Strengthening Coordinator
                                                                                                                   E/2013/6, op19
     for data collection and analysis;                                                                             E/2012/3, op19


156. Takes note of the efforts of Member States, the United Nations system and the international com-            A/RES/69/135, op26 (2014)
                                                                                                                 Strengthening Coordination
     munity to strengthen preparedness and local, national and regional humanitarian response                    See also: Strengthening Coordination
     capacity, and calls upon the United Nations and relevant partners to continue support in this regard;         A/RES/68/102, op24 (2013)
                                                                                                                   A/RES/67/87, op22 (2012)
                                                                                                                   A/RES/66/119, op17 (2011)


157. Also calls upon Member States that are in a position to do so and development and humanitarian part-        A/RES/69/135, op37 (2014)
                                                                                                                 Strengthening Coordination
     ners, in their efforts to provide flexible resources, to consider ways of better mainstreaming the need
     for preparedness and building resilience in the provision of humanitarian and development assistance,
     including reconstruction and rehabilitation, inter alia, with a view to ensuring smooth transition
     from relief to development;

158. Encourages Member States, with the support of relevant organizations, as appropriate, to strengthen         E/2014/13, op3 (2014)
                                                                                                                 ECOSOC Strengthening Coordination
     leadership and commitment to preventing and mitigating humanitarian crises, including through
     integrating risk management into national development plans, and in this regard encour-
     ages humanitarian and development organizations, in cooperation with Governments, to continue to
     strengthen efforts to address the underlying risks and vulnerabilities, including through considering
     risk management and resilience strategies;


                                                                                                                 60 | REFERENCE GUIDE / 2015
159. Encourages Member States to improve data collection and analysis to facilitate the exchange               E/2014/13, op24 (2014)
                                                                                                               ECOSOC Strengthening Coordination
     of information with humanitarian organizations of the United Nations, in order to support                 See also: ECOSOC Strengthening Coordination
     preparedness efforts and to improve the effectiveness of needs-based humanitarian response, and             E/2013/6, op19
                                                                                                                 E/2012/3, op19
     encourages the United Nations system, as appropriate, and other relevant actors to continue to assist
     developing countries in their efforts to build local and national capacities for data collection and
     analysis;

Dispositions addressed to the United Nations and/or the humanitarian system in general

160. Organizations of the United Nations system involved in the funding and provision of assistance            A/RES/46/182, op16 (1991)
                                                                                                               Strengthening Coordination
     relevant to the prevention of emergencies should be provided with sufficient and readily available
     resources;

161. Recognizes efforts by the Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency Relief           A/RES/55/163, op7 (2000)
                                                                                                               Cooperation in Natural Disasters
     Coordinator, the members of the Inter-Agency Standing Committee and other members of the United           See also: Cooperation in Natural Disasters
     Nations system in promoting preparedness for response at the national, regional and interna-                A/RES/54/233, op5 (1999)

     tional levels and in strengthening the mobilization and coordination of humanitarian assistance of
     the United Nations system in the field of natural disasters, and in this context welcomes the expansion
     of the United Nations disaster assessment and coordination teams to include experts from all
     areas of the world;

162. Calls upon United Nations country teams in consultation with and in support of Governments                E/2002/32, op6
                                                                                                               ECOSOC Strengthening Coordination
     to promote contingency planning for possible risks related to complex emergencies or natural
     disaster;



                                                                                                               61 | REFERENCE GUIDE / 2015
163. Encourages the United Nations system and other relevant humanitarian and development actors to           A/RES/65/264, op 33 (2011)
                                                                                                              Cooperation in Natural Disasters
     support humanitarian coordinators and resident coordinators, in order to strengthen their                See also: Cooperation in Natural Disasters
     capacity, inter alia, to support the host Government in implementing preparedness measures                 A/RES/64/251, op31 (2010)

     and to coordinate preparedness activities of country teams in support of national efforts,
     and also encourages the United Nations system and other relevant humanitarian actors to further
     strengthen the ability to quickly and flexibly deploy humanitarian professionals to support Govern-
     ments and country teams in the immediate aftermath of a disaster;

164. Encourages the United Nations and humanitarian and development organizations to support national,        A/RES/69/243, op40 (2014)
                                                                                                              Cooperation in Natural Disasters
     subnational and local governments and communities in their responsibility to develop long-term           See also: Cooperation in Natural Disasters
     strategies and multi-year operational plans for preparedness that are embedded within disas-               A/RES/68/103, op37 (2013)

     ter risk reduction and resilience strategies in line with the Hyogo Framework for Action;

Dispositions addressed to specific actors

165. On the basis of existing mandates and drawing upon monitoring arrangements available within the          A/RES/46/182, op19 (1991)
                                                                                                              Strengthening Coordination
     system, the United Nations should intensify efforts, building upon the existing capacities of relevant
     organizations and entities of the United Nations, for the systematic pooling, analysis and dissemi-
     nation of early-warning information on natural disasters and other emergencies. In this con-
     text, the United Nations should consider making use as appropriate of the early-warning capacities of
     Governments and intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations;

166. Requests the Secretary-General, after consultations with Governments, to report on ways and              A/RES/47/168, op8 (1992)
                                                                                                              Strengthening Coordination
     means to improve further United Nations capability in the areas of prevention and prepar-
     edness in relation to natural disasters and other emergencies, in particular emergencies involving
     food, medicines, shelter and health care, as provided for in General Assembly resolution 46/182;

                                                                                                              62 | REFERENCE GUIDE / 2015
167. Encourages the Secretary-General to develop further the Humanitarian Early Warning System, to              A/RES/51/194, op14 (1996)
                                                                                                                Strengthening Coordination
     make it fully operational as soon as possible and to consult all States on the use to which the database
     could be put, as well as its further development, taking into account that early warning information
     should be made available in an unrestricted and timely manner to all interested Governments and
     authorities concerned;

168. Also encourages further efforts by the United Nations Development Programme to strengthen                  A/RES/54/233, op6 (1999)
                                                                                                                Cooperation in Natural Disasters
     operational activities and capacity-building in natural disaster mitigation, prevention and
     preparedness, taking due account of the evolving comprehensive strategy to maximize international
     cooperation in the field of natural disasters;

169. Requests the Secretary-General, in consultation with the affected countries and relevant humani-           A/RES/65/133, op14 (2010)
                                                                                                                Strengthening Coordination
     tarian and development actors, to carry out an assessment of steps taken by the United                     See also: Strengthening Coordination
     Nations and relevant partners to support efforts to strengthen local, national and                           A/RES/64/76, op13 (2009)

     regional humanitarian response capacity and to include his findings as well as recommen-
     dations for enhancing United Nations support in this regard in his report to the General Assembly
     at its sixty-sixth session;

170. Encourages the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs to continue to work with                A/RES/69/135, op28 (2014)
                                                                                                                Strengthening Coordination
     Member States and relevant United Nations entities to facilitate the exchange of updated,                  See also: Strengthening Coordination
     accurate and reliable information, including through mutually comprehensible harmo-                          A/RES/68/102, op26 (2013)
                                                                                                                  A/RES/67/87, op24 (2012)
     nized data, to ensure better assessment of needs in order to improve preparedness and humani-
     tarian response;



                                                                                                                63 | REFERENCE GUIDE / 2015
II. DISASTER RISK REDUCTION

Overarching principles, polices and guidelines

171. The international community should adequately assist developing countries in strengthening their            A/RES/46/182, op13 (1991)
                                                                                                                 Strengthening Coordination
     capacity in disaster prevention and mitigation, both at the national and regional levels, for exam-
     ple, in establishing and enhancing integrated programmes in this regard;

172. In order to reduce the impact of disasters there should be increased awareness of the need for estab-       A/RES/46/182, op14 (1991)
                                                                                                                 Strengthening Coordination
     lishing disaster mitigation strategies, particularly in disaster-prone countries. There should be a
     greater exchange and dissemination of existing and new technical information related to the assess-
     ment, prediction and mitigation of disasters. As called for in the International Decade for Natural
     Disaster Reduction, efforts should be intensified to develop measures for prevention and mitigation of
     natural disasters and similar emergencies through programmes of technical assistance and modalities
     for favourable access to, and transfer of, relevant technology;

173. Welcomes the global review of disaster reduction initiatives coordinated by the secretariat                 A/RES/57/152, op20 (2002)
                                                                                                                 Cooperation in Natural Disasters
     of the International Strategy for Disaster Reduction, and emphasizes the importance of periodic
     review as a means of discussing disaster trends, assessing policies aimed at mitigating the
     impact of disaster and offering examples of successful initiatives;

174. Stresses the need to strengthen institutional capacity at all levels as well as disaster risk               E/2003/5, op13
                                                                                                                 ECOSOC Strengthening Coordination
     reduction programmes, particularly in developing countries and countries with economies in transi-
     tion, in order to minimize vulnerabilities and disaster risks as well as to avoid or limit adverse impact
     of natural hazards within the broad context of sustainable development;


                                                                                                                 64 | REFERENCE GUIDE / 2015
175. Emphasizes the importance of building effective and inclusive partnerships, including in risk plan-       E/2004/50, op24
                                                                                                               ECOSOC Strengthening Coordination
     ning, with populations that live in disaster-prone and disaster-affected areas;

176. Reaffirms that disaster risk analysis and vulnerability reduction form an integral part of humani-        A/RES/59/212, op7 (2004)
                                                                                                               Cooperation in Natural Disasters
     tarian assistance, poverty eradication and sustainable development strategies and need to be consid-      See also: Cooperation in Natural Disasters
     ered in the development plans of all vulnerable countries and communities, including, where appro-          A/RES/58/25, op7 (2003)
                                                                                                                 A/RES/57/152, op7 (2002)
     priate, in plans relating to post-disaster recovery and the transition from relief to development, and      A/RES/56/103, op7 (2001)

     affirms that within such preventive strategies, disaster preparedness and early warning
     systems must be further strengthened at the country and regional levels, inter alia, through
     better coordination among relevant United Nations bodies and cooperation with Govern-
     ments of affected countries and regional and other relevant organizations with the aim of
     maximizing the effectiveness of natural disaster response and reducing the impact of natural disasters,
     particularly in developing countries;

177. Emphasises the importance of mainstreaming the perspective of persons with disabilities in dis-           A/RES/69/243, op36 (2014)
                                                                                                               Cooperation in Natural Disasters
     aster risk reduction, and recognizes the need for their inclusive participation in and contribution to
     disaster preparedness, emergency response, recovery and transition from relief to development, as
     well as the implementation of policies and programmes that are inclusive of and accessible
     to persons with disabilities;

178. Strongly encourages giving appropriate consideration to disaster risk reduction and the building of       A/RES/69/243, op52 (2014)
                                                                                                               Cooperation in Natural Disasters
     resilience to disasters within the post-2015 development agenda and promoting a complementary
     and coherent approach between that agenda and the post-2015 framework for disaster risk reduction;



                                                                                                               65 | REFERENCE GUIDE / 2015
Dispositions addressed to Member States

179. Encourages Governments, in particular through their disaster management or response                       A/RES/55/163, op10 (2000)
                                                                                                               Cooperation in Natural Disasters
     agencies, as appropriate, relevant organizations of the United Nations system and non-governmental
     organizations, to continue to cooperate with the Secretary-General and the Under-Secretary-
     General for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency Relief Coordinator to maximize the effec-
     tiveness of the international response to natural disasters, based, inter alia, on humanitarian
     need, from relief to development, and also to maximize the effectiveness of disaster prepared-
     ness and mitigation efforts at all levels;

180. Invites States, as appropriate, to give priority to and fully integrate disaster risk reduction strate-   E/2004/50, op26
                                                                                                               ECOSOC Strengthening Coordination
     gies into all relevant legal, policy and planning instruments in order to address the social,
     economic and environmental dimensions that influence vulnerability to natural hazards,
     bearing in mind the International Strategy for Disaster Reduction;

181. Calls upon States, the United Nations and other relevant actors, as appropriate, to assist in address-    A/RES/59/212, op11 (2005)
                                                                                                               Cooperation in Natural Disasters
     ing knowledge gaps in disaster management and risk reduction by identifying ways of improv-
     ing systems and networks for the collection and analysis of information on disasters, vulner-
     ability and risk to facilitate informed decision-making;

182. Recognizes the importance of applying a multi-hazard approach to preparedness, and encour-                A/RES/69/243, op14 (2014)
                                                                                                               Cooperation in Natural Disasters
     ages Member States, taking into account their specific circumstances, and the United Nations system       See also: Cooperation in Natural Disasters
     to continue to apply the approach to their preparedness activities, including by giving due regard to,      A/RES/68/103, op14 (2013)
                                                                                                                 A/RES/67/231, op13 (2012)
     inter alia, secondary environmental hazards stemming from industrial and technological accidents;           A/RES/66/277, op13 (2011)




                                                                                                               66 | REFERENCE GUIDE / 2015
183. Urges States to assess their progress in strengthening preparedness levels for humanitar-                 E/2014/13, op7 (2014)
                                                                                                               ECOSOC Strengthening Coordination
     ian response, with a view to increasing efforts to develop, update and strengthen disaster prepar-        See also: ECOSOC Strengthening Coordination
     edness and risk reduction measures at all levels, in accordance with the Hyogo Framework for                E/2011/1, op3
                                                                                                                 E/2010/1, op4
     Action 2005–2015: Building the Resilience of Nations and Communities to Disasters, in particular            E/2009/3, op4
                                                                                                                 E/2008/36, op4
     priority 5 thereof, taking into account their own circumstances and capacities and in coordination          E/2007/3, op9
                                                                                                                 E/2006/5, op4
     with relevant actors, as appropriate, and encourages the international community and relevant United
     Nations entities, including the International Strategy for Disaster Reduction, United Nations funds and
     programmes, as well as the specialized agencies, to give increased priority to and mainstream disaster
     risk reduction, including preparedness, in particular through supporting national and local efforts in
     that regard;

184. Calls upon Member States and the international community to increase resources for disaster               A/RES/69/243, op39 (2014)
                                                                                                               Strengthening Coordination
     risk reduction measures, including in the areas of prevention, mitigation and preparedness                See also: Strengthening Coordination
     for effective response and contingency planning, in order to, inter alia, further strengthen                A/RES/65/133, op7 (2010)
                                                                                                                 A/RES/64/76, op7 (2009)
     national and local capacities to prepare for and respond to humanitarian emergencies, and                   A/RES/63/139, op6 (2008)
                                                                                                                 A/RES/62/94, op9 (2007)
     encourages closer cooperation between national stakeholders and humanitarian and development
     actors in this regard;




                                                                                                               67 | REFERENCE GUIDE / 2015
185. Calls upon Member States, the United Nations system and other relevant humanitarian and develop-            A/RES/69/243, op3 (2014)
                                                                                                                 Cooperation in Natural Disasters
     ment actors to accelerate the full implementation of the Hyogo Declaration and the Hyogo Framework          See also: Cooperation in Natural Disasters
     for Action 2005–2015: Building the Resilience of Nations and Communities to Disasters, in particular          A/RES/68/103, op3 (2013)
                                                                                                                   A/RES/67/231, op3 (2012)
     those commitments related to assistance for developing countries that are prone to natural disasters          A/RES/66/277, op3 (2011)
                                                                                                                   A/RES/65/264, op3 (2010)
     and for disaster-stricken States in the transition phase towards sustainable physical, social and eco-        A/RES/64/251, op3 (2009)
                                                                                                                   A/RES/63/141, op3 (2008)
     nomic recovery, for risk-reduction activities in post-disaster recovery and for rehabilitation processes,     A/RES/62/92, op3 (2007)
     and in this regard, encourages States, the United Nations system and all stakeholders to                      A/RES/61/131, op3 (2006)
                                                                                                                   A/RES/60/125, op3 (2005)
     continue to engage in the consultations on the successor to the Framework, culminating at
     the Third World Conference on Disaster Risk Reduction, to be held in Sendai, Japan, from
     14 to 18 March 2015, and to implement the successor framework;

186. Calls upon Member States, the United Nations system and other relevant humanitarian and develop-            A/RES/65/264, op4 (2011)
                                                                                                                 Cooperation in Natural Disasters
     ment actors to accelerate the implementation of the Hyogo Framework for Action, emphasizes the pro-         See also: Cooperation in Natural Disasters
     motion and strengthening of disaster preparedness activities at all levels, in particular in hazard-prone     A/RES/64/251, op4 (2010)

     areas, and encourages them to increase funding and cooperation for disaster risk reduction
     activities, including disaster preparedness;




                                                                                                                  68 | REFERENCE GUIDE / 2015
187. Emphasizes the need to promote and strengthen disaster preparedness activities at all levels,              A/RES/69/243, op4 (2014)
                                                                                                                Cooperation in Natural Disasters
     in particular in hazard-prone areas, and encourages Member States, the United Nations system and           See also: Cooperation in Natural Disasters
     other relevant humanitarian and development actors to increase funding and cooperation for disaster          A/RES/68/103, op4 (2013)
                                                                                                                  A/RES/67/231, op4 (2012)
     risk reduction activities, including disaster preparedness;                                                  A/RES/66/277, op5 (2011)
                                                                                                                  A/RES/64/251, op5 (2009)
                                                                                                                  A/RES/63/141, op4 (2008)
                                                                                                                  A/RES/62/92, op4 (2007)
                                                                                                                  A/RES/61/131, op4 (2006)
                                                                                                                  A/RES/60/125, op4 (2005)
                                                                                                                  A/RES/59/212, op3 (2004)
                                                                                                                  A/RES/58/25, op3 (2003)
                                                                                                                  A/RES/57/152, op3 (2002)
                                                                                                                  A/RES/56/103, op3 (2001)
                                                                                                                  A/RES/55/163, op3 (2000)
                                                                                                                  A/RES/54/233, op3 (1999)


188. Acknowledges that climate change, among other factors, contributes to environmental deg-                   A/RES/69/243, op7 (2014)
                                                                                                                Cooperation in Natural Disasters
     radation and to the increase in the intensity and frequency of climate and extreme weather                 See also: Cooperation in Natural Disasters
     events, both of which amplify disaster risk, and in this regard encourages Member States, as well            A/RES/68/103, op7 (2013)
                                                                                                                  A/RES/67/231, op6 (2012)
     as relevant international, regional and subregional organizations, in accordance with their specific         A/RES/66/277, op6 (2011)
                                                                                                                  A/RES/65/264, op6 (2010)
     mandates, to support adaptation to the adverse effects of climate change and to strengthen disaster          A/RES/64/251, op6 (2009)
     risk reduction and early warning systems in order to minimize the humanitarian consequences
     of natural disasters, including through the provision of technology and support for capacity-building in
     developing countries;




                                                                                                                69 | REFERENCE GUIDE / 2015
189. Encourages Member States to consider elaborating and presenting to the International Strategy             A/RES/69/263, op13 (2014)
                                                                                                               Cooperation in Natural Disasters
     for Disaster Reduction secretariat their national platforms for disaster reduction in accord-             See also: Cooperation in Natural Disasters
     ance with the Hyogo Framework for Action, and also encourages States to cooperate with each other           A/RES/68/103, op13 (2013)
                                                                                                                 A/RES/67/231, op 12 (2012)
     to reach this objective;                                                                                    A/RES/66/277, op11 (2011)
                                                                                                                 A/RES/65/263, op11 (2010)
                                                                                                                 A/RES/64/251, op11 (2009)
                                                                                                                 A/RES/63/141, op9 (2008)


190. Encourages Member States, as well as relevant regional and international organizations, in                E/2014/13, op6
                                                                                                               ECOSOC Strengthening Coordination
     accordance with their specific mandates, to support adaptation to the effects of climate change           See also: ECOSOC Strengthening Coordination
     and to strengthen disaster risk reduction and early warning systems in order to minimize the                E/2013/6, op4
                                                                                                                 E/2011/8, op4
     humanitarian consequences of natural disasters, including those related to the continuing impact of         E/2010/1, op18
                                                                                                                 E/2009/3, op17
     climate change, takes note of the “2011 Global Assessment Report on Disaster Risk Reduction” (foot-         E/2008/36, op9
     note) and encourages relevant entities to continue research on the humanitarian implications;

191. Encourages Member States to put in place, as appropriate, customs measures to improve effec-              A/RES/69/263, op20 (2014)
                                                                                                               Cooperation in Natural Disasters
     tiveness in responding to natural disasters;                                                              See also: Cooperation in Natural Disasters
                                                                                                                 A/RES/68/103, op19 (2013)


192. Calls upon all States to adopt, where required, and to continue to implement effectively, necessary       A/RES/69/263, op20 (2014)
                                                                                                               Cooperation in Natural Disasters
     legislative and other appropriate measures to mitigate the effects of natural disasters and
     integrate disaster risk reduction strategies into development planning, as well as to incorpo-
     rate a gender perspective into policies, planning and funding, and in this regard requests the interna-
     tional community to continue to assist developing countries as well as countries with economies in
     transition, as appropriate;


                                                                                                                70 | REFERENCE GUIDE / 2015
193. Urges Member States, the United Nations, humanitarian and development organizations to prioritize        A/RES/69/263, op44 (2014)
                                                                                                              Cooperation in Natural Disasters
     risk management and shift towards an anticipatory approach to humanitarian crises in order to
     prevent and reduce human suffering and economic losses;

194. Calls upon Member States and the international community to increase and commit adequate,                A/RES/69/135, op17 (2014)
                                                                                                              Strengthening Coordination
     timely, flexible and predictable resources for disaster risk reduction in order to build resil-
     ience, including through complementary humanitarian and development programming and by further
     strengthening national and local capacities to prevent, prepare for and respond to humanitarian emer-
     gencies, and furthermore encourages closer cooperation between national stakeholders and humani-
     tarian and development actors in this regard;

195. Stresses the need to strengthen resilience at all levels, and in this regard encourages Member States,   A/RES/69/243, op46 (2014)
                                                                                                              Cooperation in Natural Disasters
     the United Nations system and other relevant actors to support efforts, as appropriate, to integrate
     resilience in humanitarian and development programming, and encourages humanitarian and
     development actors to pursue, where appropriate, common resilience and risk-manage-
     ment objectives, achievable through joint analysis, planning, programming and funding;

196. Encourages humanitarian and development actors to pursue, where appropriate, common risk-manage-         A/RES/69/135, op38 (2014)
                                                                                                              Strengthening Coordination
     ment and resilience objectives, achievable through joint analysis, planning, programming and funding;

197. Calls upon Member States, the United Nations and humanitarian organizations to provide emergency         A/RES/69/135, op24 (2014)
                                                                                                              Strengthening Coordination
     assistance in ways that are supportive of recovery and long-term development, where appropriate,         See also: Strengthening Coordination
     including through prioritizing humanitarian tools that strengthen resilience, such as, but not             A/RES/68/102, op 22 (2013)
                                                                                                              Cooperation in Natural Disasters
     limited to, cash transfers, local procurement of food and services and social safety nets;                 A/RES/69/243, op47 (2014)




                                                                                                              71 | REFERENCE GUIDE / 2015
Dispositions addressed to the United Nations and the humanitarian system in general

198. Encourages relevant United Nations organizations to support the efforts of Member States, as appro-   A/RES/62/94, op11 (2007)
                                                                                                           Strengthening Coordination
     priate, to strengthen systems for identifying and monitoring disaster risk, including vulnerabil-
     ity and natural hazards;

199. Calls upon the United Nations system and other humanitarian actors to improve the dissemination       A/RES/69/243, op41 (2014)
                                                                                                           Cooperation in Natural Disasters
     of tools and services to support enhanced disaster risk reduction, in particular preparedness,        See also: Cooperation in Natural Disasters
     and early recovery;                                                                                     A/RES/68/103, op38 (2013)
                                                                                                             A/RES/67/231, op32 (2012)
                                                                                                             A/RES/66/277, op29 (2011)
                                                                                                             A/RES/64/251, op28 (2010)


200. Encourages the United Nations and humanitarian and development organizations to support national,     A/RES/69/243, op40 (2014)
                                                                                                           Cooperation in Natural Disasters
     subnational and local governments and communities in their responsibility to develop long-term
     strategies and multi-year operational plans for preparedness that are embedded within disas-
     ter risk reduction and resilience strategies in line with the Hyogo Framework for Action;

Dispositions addressed to specific actors

201. Encourages the United Nations Development Programme, the Office of the Coordination of                E/2003/5, op14
                                                                                                           ECOSOC Strengthening Coordination
     Humanitarian Affairs and the International Strategy for Disaster Reduction to continue to
     strengthen their coordination with the view, inter alia, to advancing the implementation of provi-
     sions of vulnerability, risk assessment and disaster management, including prevention, miti-
     gation, preparedness, response and recovery as contained in the Johannesburg Plan of Imple-
     mentation adopted at the World Summit on Sustainable Development;



                                                                                                           72 | REFERENCE GUIDE / 2015
202. Takes note with interest of the initiatives taken by the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian       A/RES/59/212, op19 (2004)
                                                                                                                Cooperation in Natural Disasters
     Affairs and the United Nations Development Programme for the establishment of regional posi-               See also: Cooperation in Natural Disasters
     tions of disaster response advisers and disaster reduction advisers to assist develop-                       A/RES/58/25, op17 (2003)
                                                                                                                  A/RES/57/152, o15 (2002)
     ing countries in capacity-building for disaster prevention, preparedness, mitigation and                     A/RES/56/103, op14 (2001)

     response in a coordinated and complementary manner;

203. Requests the United Nations humanitarian and development organizations to improve their coor-              A/RES/69/243, op39 (2014)
                                                                                                                Cooperation in Natural Disasters
     dination of disaster recovery efforts, from relief to development, inter alia, by strengthening            See also: Cooperation in Natural Disasters
     institutional, coordination and strategic planning efforts in disaster preparedness, resilience-building     A/RES/68/103, op36 (2013)
                                                                                                                  A/RES/67/231, op31 (2012)
     and recovery, in support of national authorities, and by ensuring that development actors participate in     A/RES/66/277, op28 (2011)

     strategic planning at an early stage;

III.   CAPACITY BUILDING

Overarching principles, policies and guidelines

204. International relief assistance should supplement national efforts to improve the capacities               A/RES/46/182, op18 (1991)
                                                                                                                Strengthening Coordination
     of developing countries to mitigate the effects of natural disasters expeditiously and effectively
     and to cope efficiently with all emergencies. The United Nations should enhance its efforts to assist
     developing countries to strengthen their capacity to respond to disasters, at the national and regional
     levels, as appropriate;




                                                                                                                73 | REFERENCE GUIDE / 2015
205. Stresses the need for increased national and regional capacity-building in early warning                    E/2003/5, op17
                                                                                                                 ECOSOC Strengthening Coordination
     and monitoring of natural hazards, natural disaster preparedness, mitigation and response,
     including through strengthening coordination in the areas of information sharing and analysis,
     logistics support, response coordination and strengthening enhanced relationships with exist-
     ing regional structures, encourages the international community to provide necessary technical
     assistance to States in this regard;

206. Encourages the channelling of increased resources to capacity –building activities in disaster-             E/2004/50, op23
                                                                                                                 ECOSOC Strengthening Coordination
     prone areas, particularly to address the dynamics and disproportionate risks that natural disas-
     ters pose in urban and rural environments;

207. Reiterates the commitment to support, as a matter of priority, the efforts of countries, in particular      A/RES/69/263, op10 (2014)
                                                                                                                 Cooperation in Natural Disasters
     developing countries, to strengthen their capacities at all levels in order to reduce risks, pre-           See also: Cooperation in Natural Disasters
     pare for and respond rapidly to natural disasters and mitigate their impact;                                  A/RES/68/103, op10 (2013)
                                                                                                                   A/RES/67/231, op9 (2012)
                                                                                                                   A/RES/66/277, op9 (2011)
                                                                                                                   A/RES/65/264, op9 (2010)
                                                                                                                   A/RES/64/251, op9 (2009)


208. Stresses that, to increase further the effectiveness of humanitarian assistance, particular international   A/RES/69/263, op15 (2014)
                                                                                                                 Cooperation in Natural Disasters
     cooperation efforts should be undertaken to enhance and broaden further the utilization of national         See also: Cooperation in Natural Disasters
     and local capacities and, where appropriate, of regional and subregional capacities for                       A/RES/68/103, op15 (2013)
                                                                                                                   A/RES/67/231, op14 (2012)
     disasters preparedness and response, which may be made available in closer proximity to the site of a         A/RES/66/277, op14 (2011)
                                                                                                                   A/RES/65/264, op 12 (2010)
     disaster, and more efficiently and at a lower cost;




                                                                                                                 74 | REFERENCE GUIDE / 2015
Dispositions addressed to Member States

209. Encourages the strengthening of cooperation among States at the regional and subregional levels           A/RES/57/150, op8 (2002)
                                                                                                               INSARAG
     in the field of disaster preparedness and response, with particular respect to capacity-building
     at all levels;

210. Encourages all States to strengthen their capacity to respond to natural and man-made disas-              E/2006/5, op8
                                                                                                               ECOSOC Strengthening Coordination
     ters, including by establishing or strengthening national contingency plans and developing or strength-
     ening, as appropriate, disaster management institutions, also encourages the sharing of knowledge
     and experience among States, and further encourages the international community to support, upon
     request, national efforts in this regard;

211. Encourages States to create an enabling environment for the capacity-building of local authorities and    A/RES/69/135, op23 (2014)
                                                                                                               Strengthening Coordination
     of national and local non-governmental and community-based organizations in order to ensure better        See also: Strengthening Coordination
     preparedness in providing timely, effective and predictable humanitarian assistance, and encourages         A/RES/68/102, op21 (2013)
                                                                                                                 A/RES/67/87, op18 (2012)
     the United Nations and humanitarian organizations to provide support to such efforts, including, as         A/RES/66/119, op14 (2011)
                                                                                                                 A/RES/65/133, op12 (2010)
     appropriate, under the Common Framework on Preparedness of the Inter-Agency Standing                        A/RES/64/76, op11 (2009)
                                                                                                                 A/RES/63/139, op10 (2008)
     Committee, the United Nations Development Group and the International Strategy for Dis-
     aster Reduction, through the transfer of technology and expertise to developing countries as well
     as through support to programmes aimed at enhancing the coordination capacities of affected States;




                                                                                                               75 | REFERENCE GUIDE / 2015
212. Also encourages Member States to create and strengthen an enabling environment for the                 E/2011/l33, op5
                                                                                                            ECOSOC Strengthening Coordination
     capacity-building of their national and local authorities, national societies of the International
                                                                                                            See also: ECOSOC Strengthening Coordination
     Red Cross and Red Crescent Movement, and national and local non-governmental and community-              E/2010/1, op4
                                                                                                              E/2009/3, op2
     based organizations in providing timely humanitarian assistance, and also encourages the interna-        E/2008/36, op2
     tional community, the relevant entities of the United Nations system and other relevant institutions     E/2007/3, op4
                                                                                                              E/2006/5, op9
     and organizations to support national authorities in their capacity-building programmes,
     including through technical cooperation and long-term partnerships, based on recognition
     of their important role in providing humanitarian assistance;

Dispositions addressed to the United Nations and/or the humanitarian system in general

213. Also emphasizes the importance of enhanced international cooperation, including through the            A/RES/59/212, op9 (2004)
                                                                                                            Cooperation in Natural Disasters
     United Nations and regional organizations, to assist developing countries in their efforts             See also: Cooperation in Natural Disasters
     to build local and national capacities and to effectively and efficiently predict, prepare for and       A/RES/58/25, op9 (2003)
                                                                                                              A/RES/57/152, op8 (2002)
     respond to natural disasters;                                                                            A/RES/56/103, op8 (2001)


214. Encourages further cooperation between the United Nations system and regional organizations            A/RES/59/212, op20 (2004)
                                                                                                            Cooperation in Natural Disasters
     in order to increase the capacity of these organizations to respond to natural disasters;              See also: Cooperation in Natural Disasters
                                                                                                              A/RES/58/25, op18 (2003)
                                                                                                              A/RES/57/152, op16 (2002)
                                                                                                              A/RES/56/103, op17 (2001)
                                                                                                              A/RES/55/163, op11 (2000)




                                                                                                            76 | REFERENCE GUIDE / 2015
215. Requests the relevant organizations of the United Nations system to continue to engage systemati-         E/2006/5, op5
                                                                                                               ECOSOC Strengthening Coordination
     cally with relevant authorities and organizations at the regional and national levels to sup-             See also: ECOSOC Strengthening Coordination
     port efforts to strengthen humanitarian response capacities at all levels, in particular through            E/2005/4, op4

     preparedness programmes, with a view to improving the overall adequacy of the deployment of
     resources;

216. Encourages the international community, including relevant United Nations organizations and the           A/RES/65/133, op10 (2010)
                                                                                                               Strengthening Coordination
     International Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies, to support efforts of Member            See also: Strengthening Coordination
     States aimed at strengthening their capacity to prepare for and respond to disasters and                    A/RES/64/76, op7 (2009)
                                                                                                                 A/RES/63/139, op7 (2008)
     to support efforts, as appropriate, to strengthen systems for identifying and monitoring disaster risk,
     including vulnerability and natural hazards;

217. Stresses that the United Nations system should continue to enhance existing humanitarian                  E/2014/13, op4
                                                                                                               ECOSOC Strengthening Coordination
     capacities, knowledge and institutions, including, as appropriate, through the transfer of technol-       See also: ECOSOC Strengthening Coordination
     ogy and expertise to developing countries, encourages the international community, the relevant             E/2010/1, op2
                                                                                                                 E/2009/3, op3
     entities of the United Nations system and other relevant institutions and organizations to support          E/2008/36, op3
                                                                                                                 E/2007/3, op5
     national authorities in their capacity-building programmes, including through technical cooperation         E/2006/5, op6
                                                                                                                 E/2005/4, op5
     and long-term partnerships, as well as by strengthening their capacity to build resilience, mitigate
     disaster risks and prepare for and respond to disasters, and also encourages Member States to cre-
     ate and strengthen an enabling environment for the capacity-building of their national and
     local authorities, national societies of the International Red Cross and Red Crescent Movement and
     national and local non-governmental and community-based organizations in providing timely humani-
     tarian assistance;



                                                                                                               77 | REFERENCE GUIDE / 2015
218. Stresses that the United Nations system should continue to enhance existing humanitarian                   A/RES/69/135, op16 (2014)
                                                                                                                Strengthening Coordination
     capacities, knowledge and institutions, including, as appropriate, through the transfer of technology
     and expertise to developing countries, and encourages the international community to support
     efforts of Member States aimed at strengthening their capacity to build resilience, mitigate
     disaster risks, and prepare for and respond to disasters;

219. Calls upon Member States, the United Nations and humanitarian and development organizations to             A/RES/69/135, op16 (2014)
                                                                                                                Strengthening Coordination
     continue to build the capacity at all levels of government and within local organizations and              See also: ECOSOC Strengthening Coordination
     communities to better prepare for hazards and respond to and recover from disasters;                         E/2011/8, op2
                                                                                                                  E/2010/1, op2
                                                                                                                  E/2009/3, op3
                                                                                                                  E/2008/36, op3
                                                                                                                  E/2007/3, op5
                                                                                                                  E/2006/5, op6
                                                                                                                  E/2005/4, op5
                                                                                                                Strengthening Coordination
                                                                                                                   A/RES/68/102, op14 (2013)

Dispositions addressed to specific actors

220. Welcomes the efforts of the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs and the United             E/2002/32, op3
                                                                                                                ECOSOC Strengthening Coordination
     Nations Development Programme to strengthen their coordination and regional activities
     so as to provide more effective support to disaster-prone countries and, to this end, calls on them, and
     other relief organizations and institutions to identify innovative ways to support those countries
     in building and, where necessary, strengthening local, national and regional capacities in
     disaster prevention, mitigation and management;




                                                                                                                78 | REFERENCE GUIDE / 2015
9.    Transition, Early Recovery, Rehabilitation and Development
REFERENCE                                                                                                    LEGISLATIVE DECISION

Overarching principles, policies and guidelines

221. There is a clear relationship between emergency, rehabilitation and development. In order to ensure     A/RES/46/182, op9 (1991)
                                                                                                             Strengthening Coordination
     a smooth transition from relief to rehabilitation and development, emergency assistance should
     be provided in ways that will be supportive of recovery and long-term development. Thus,
     emergency measures should be seen as a step towards long-term development;

222. Economic growth and sustainable development are essential for prevention of and preparedness            A/RES/46/182, op10 (1991)
                                                                                                             Strengthening Coordination
     against natural disasters and other emergencies. Many emergencies reflect the underlying crisis in      See also: Cooperation in Natural Disasters
     development facing developing countries. Humanitarian assistance should therefore be accom-               A/RES/59/212, op6 (2004)
                                                                                                               A/RES/58/25, op6 (2003)
     panied by a renewal of commitment to economic growth and sustainable development of                       A/RES/57/152, op6 (2002)
                                                                                                               A/RES/56/103, op6 (2001)
     developing countries. In this context, adequate resources must be made available to address               A/RES/55/163, op 5 (2000)
     developmental problems;

223. Contributions for humanitarian assistance should be provided in a way which is not to the detri-        A/RES/46/182, op11 (1991)
                                                                                                             Strengthening Coordination
     ment of resources made available for international cooperation for development;                         See also: Cooperation in Natural Disasters |
                                                                                                               A/RES/54/233, op16 (1999)


224. International cooperation and support for rehabilitation and reconstruction should continue with sus-   A/RES/46/182, op41 (1991)
                                                                                                             Strengthening Coordination
     tained intensity after the initial relief stage. The rehabilitation phase should be used as an oppor-
     tunity to restructure and improve facilities and services destroyed by emergencies in order to
     enable them to withstand the impact of future emergencies;

                                                                                                             79 | REFERENCE GUIDE / 2015
225. Notes with concern the disturbing trend of low or late funding for rehabilitation programmes               E/2003/5, op28
                                                                                                                ECOSOC Strengthening Coordination
     aimed at helping affected communities to attain self-sufficiency;

226. Recognizes that, inter alia, early engagement in planning fuller coverage of the needs of all              E/2003/5, op29
                                                                                                                ECOSOC Strengthening Coordination
     sectors, more support for recovery and long-term development activities, capacity-building at
     all relevant levels and enhancement of national ownership is critical to managing the transition from
     relief to development;

227. Stresses the importance of addressing, based on need, the situation of the least developed countries       E/2003/5, op31
                                                                                                                ECOSOC Strengthening Coordination
     affected by conflict, natural disasters and other humanitarian situations and of improving their insti-
     tutional capacity and providing adequate support for rehabilitation, reconstruction, long-term
     sustainable development, poverty reduction and, where appropriate, peace-building efforts
     of least developed countries emerging from those situations;

228. Reaffirms that disaster risk analysis and vulnerability reduction form an integral part of humani-         A/RES/59/212, op7 (2004)
                                                                                                                Cooperation in Natural Disasters
     tarian assistance, poverty eradication and sustainable development strategies and need to be con-          See also: Cooperation in Natural Disasters
     sidered in the development plans of all vulnerable countries and communities, including,                     A/RES/58/25, op7 (2003)
                                                                                                                  A/RES/57/152, op7 (2002)
     where appropriate, in plans relating to post-disaster recovery and the transition from relief                A/RES/56/103, op7 (2001)

     to development, and affirms that within such preventive strategies, disaster preparedness and
     early warning systems must be further strengthened at the country and regional levels, inter alia,
     through better coordination among relevant United Nations bodies and cooperation with Governments
     of affected countries and regional and other relevant organizations with the aim of maximizing the
     effectiveness of natural disaster response and reducing the impact of natural disasters, particularly in
     developing countries;



                                                                                                                80 | REFERENCE GUIDE / 2015
229. Encourages efforts to provide safe and enabling learning environments and quality education for all,      A/RES/69/243, op37 (2014)
                                                                                                               Cooperation in Natural Disasters
     especially for girls and boys, in humanitarian emergencies caused by natural disasters, including in      See also: Strengthening Coordination
     order to contribute to a smooth transition from relief to development;                                      A/RES/69/135 op27 (2014)
                                                                                                                 A/RES/68/102, op25 (2013)
                                                                                                                 A/RES/67/87, op23 (2012)
                                                                                                                 A/RES/66/119, op18 (2011)
                                                                                                                 A/RES/65/133, op15 (2010)
                                                                                                                 A/RES/64/76, op14 (2009)
                                                                                                                 A/RES/63/139, op12 (2008)
                                                                                                               ECOSOC Strengthening Coordination
                                                                                                                 E/2011/8, op8
                                                                                                                 E/2010/1, op7
                                                                                                                 E/2009/3, op7
                                                                                                                 E/2002/32, op25


230. Acknowledges that early recovery should receive further funding, and encourages the provision of          A/RES/69/243, op43 (2014)
                                                                                                               Cooperation in Natural Disasters
     timely, flexible and predictable funding for early recovery, including through established human-         See also: Cooperation in Natural Disasters
     itarian instruments;                                                                                        A/RES/68/103, op40 (2013)
                                                                                                                 A/RES/67/231, op34 (2012)
                                                                                                                 A/RES/66/277, op31 (2011)
                                                                                                                 A/RES/65/264, op32 (2010)
                                                                                                                 A/RES/64/251, op30 (2009)


231. Encourages the United Nations system, humanitarian organizations and development organizations to         A/RES/69/135, op18 (2014)
                                                                                                               Strengthening Coordination
     continue their efforts to mainstream preparedness, early action and early recovery into their             See also: Strengthening Coordination
     programming, acknowledges that preparedness, early action and early recovery should receive fur-            A/RES/68/102, op16 (2013)
                                                                                                                 A/RES/67/87, op20 (2012)
     ther funding, and in this regard encourages the provision of timely, flexible, predictable and adequate
     resources, including from humanitarian and development budgets as appropriate;




                                                                                                               81 | REFERENCE GUIDE / 2015
232. Emphasizes the need to mobilize adequate, flexible and sustainable resources for recovery,                 A/RES/69/263, op17 (2014)
                                                                                                                Cooperation in Natural Disasters
     preparedness and disaster risk reduction activities in order to ensure predictable and timely              See also: Cooperation in Natural Disasters
     access to resources for humanitarian assistance in emergencies resulting from disasters associated           A/RES/68/103, op43 (2013)
                                                                                                                  A/RES/67/231, op37 (2012)
     with natural hazards;                                                                                        A/RES/66/277, op33 (2011)
                                                                                                                  A/RES/65/264, op34 (2010)


233. Stresses, in this context, the importance of strengthening international cooperation, particularly         A/RES/69/263, op50 (2014)
                                                                                                                Cooperation in Natural Disasters
     through the effective use of multilateral mechanisms, in the timely provision of humanitarian assis-       See also: Cooperation in Natural Disasters
     tance through all phases of a disaster, from relief and recovery to development, including the provision     A/RES/68/103, op16 (2013)
                                                                                                                  A/RES/67/231, op15 (2012)
     of adequate resources;                                                                                       A/RES/66/277, op16 (2011)


234. Encourages all relevant stakeholders, including Member States, to take appropriate measures to             A/RES/69/263, op18 (2014)
                                                                                                                Cooperation in Natural Disasters
     reduce and discourage the sending of unsolicited, unneeded or inappropriate relief goods                   See also: Cooperation in Natural Disasters
     in response to disasters;                                                                                    A/RES/68/103, op17 (2013)


235. Encourages efforts to enhance cooperation and coordination of United Nations humanitarian                  E/2014/13, op10
                                                                                                                ECOSOC Strengthening Coordination
     entities, other relevant humanitarian organizations and donor countries with the affected                  See also: ECOSOC Strengthening Coordination
     State, with a view to planning and delivering emergency humanitarian assistance in ways that are sup-        E/2013/6, op6
                                                                                                                  E/2012/6, op7
     portive of early recovery as well as sustainable rehabilitation, reconstruction and development efforts;

236. Recognizes that information and telecommunications technology can play an important role in                A/RES/69/263, op26 (2014)
                                                                                                                Cooperation in Natural Disasters
     disaster response, encourages Member States to develop emergency response telecommunications               See also: Cooperation in Natural Disasters
     capacities and encourages the international community to assist the efforts of developing countries          A/RES/68/103, op25 (2013)
                                                                                                                  A/RES/67/231, op22 (2012)
     in this area, where needed, including in the recovery phase, and in this regard encourages Member            A/RES/66/277, op20 (2011)

     States that have not acceded to or ratified the Tampere Convention on the Provision of Telecom-
     munication Resources for Disaster Mitigation and Relief Operations to consider doing so;

                                                                                                                82 | REFERENCE GUIDE / 2015
Dispositions addressed to Member States

237. Calls upon States to respond quickly and generously to consolidated appeals for humanitarian assis-   A/RES/48/57, op16 (1993)
                                                                                                           Strengthening Coordination
     tance, taking into account rehabilitation and long-term development requirements;

238. Calls upon Governments, when providing guidance to the United Nations system, including the agen-     E/2002/32, op10
                                                                                                           ECOSOC Strengthening Coordination
     cies, funds and programmes through their governing bodies, to articulate areas of responsibility in
     addressing the transition from relief to development;

239. Notes that the transition phase after natural disasters is often excessively long and                 A/RES/55/163, op8 (2000)
                                                                                                           Cooperation in Natural Disasters
     characterized by a number of gaps and that Governments, in cooperation with relief                    See also: Cooperation in Natural Disasters
     agencies, as appropriate, when planning for meeting needs, should place these needs                     A/RES/54/233, op14 (1999)

     in the perspective of sustainable development whenever such an approach is possible, and
     in this context take notes of the work of the United Nations disaster assessment and coordination
     teams;

240. Recognizes that the need for coordination increases and becomes more complex in post-                 E/2003/5, op32
                                                                                                           ECOSOC Strengthening Coordination
     conflict transition, and encourages States and the United Nations system, as appropriate, to
     enhance their efforts towards the early assumption of the coordination role of the Govern-
     ment as well as integrated coordination, including information management, inclusive planning,
     donor coordination, strengthening the United Nations Resident Coordinator system and the full par-
     ticipation of concerned Governments in needs assessments, planning mechanisms and coordination
     processes;




                                                                                                           83 | REFERENCE GUIDE / 2015
241. Encourages the Economic and Social Council to consider the issue of the transition from relief to        A/RES/58/114, op6 (2003)
                                                                                                              Strengthening Coordination
     development in an integrated manner, through a possible joint meeting of the humanitarian and            See also: ECOSOC Strengthening Coordination
     operational segments, during its substantive session in the near future, in view of the impor-             E/2003/5, op33

     tance of getting humanitarian and development organizations, including international
     and regional financial institutions and non-governmental organizations, to discuss and
     review more fully the implications, of the transition from relief to development in their
     programming, and invites the Council to take into account, inter alia, the work in progress of the
     United Nations system to clarify its role in post-conflict transition situations as well as other rel-
     evant information for consideration;

242. Encourages States to support, including through the allocation of funds, the development and             E/2004/50, op45
                                                                                                              ECOSOC Strengthening Coordination
     implementation of the 4Rs (“repatriation, reintegration, rehabilitation, and reconstruction”)
     and of other programming tools, to facilitate the transition from relief to development;

243. Encourages Member States, relevant United Nations organizations and international financial institu-     A/RES/69/243, op29 (2014)
                                                                                                              Cooperation in Natural Disasters
     tions to enhance the global capacity for sustainable post-disaster recovery in areas such                See also: Cooperation in Natural Disasters
     as coordination with traditional and non-traditional partners, identification and dissemination of         A/RES/68/103, op28 (2013)
                                                                                                                A/RES/67/231, op25 (2012)
     lessons learned, development of common tools and mechanisms for recovery needs assessment,                 A/RES/65/264, op23 (2011)
                                                                                                                A/RES/63/141, op18 (2008)
     strategy development and programming, and incorporation of risk reduction into all recovery pro-
     cesses, and welcomes the ongoing efforts in this end;




                                                                                                              84 | REFERENCE GUIDE / 2015
244. Calls upon States to fully implement the Hyogo Declaration and the Hyogo Framework for Action          A/RES/69/2643 op3 (2014)
                                                                                                            Cooperation in Natural Disasters
     2005-2015: Building the Resilience of Nations and Communities to Disasters, in particular those com-   See also: Cooperation in Natural Disasters
     mitments related to assistance for developing countries that are prone to natural disasters and for      A/RES/68/103,op3 (2013)
                                                                                                              A/RES/67/231, op3 (2012)
     disaster-stricken States in the transition phase towards sustainable physical, social and eco-           A/RES/65/264, op3 (2011)
                                                                                                              A/RES/64/251, op3 (2010)
     nomic recovery, for risk-reduction activities in post-disaster recovery and for rehabilitation
     processes; and in this regard, encourages States, the United Nations system and all stakeholders to
     continue to engage in the consultations on the successor to the Framework, culminating at the Third
     World Conference on Disaster Risk Reduction, to be held in Sendai, Japan, from 14 to 18 March 2015,
     and to implement the successor framework;

245. Urges Member States, the United Nations system and other humanitarian actors to consider the           A/RES/69/2643 op24 (2014)
                                                                                                            Cooperation in Natural Disasters
     specific and differentiated consequences of natural disasters both in rural and urban areas,           See also: Cooperation in Natural Disasters
     when designing and implementing disaster risk reduction, preparedness, humanitarian assis-               A/RES/68/103, op23 (2013)
                                                                                                              A/RES/67/231, op20 (2012)
     tance and early recovery strategies, giving special emphasis to addressing the needs of those            A/RES/66/277, op19 (2011)
                                                                                                              A/RES/65/264, op18 (2010)
     living in rural and urban poor areas prone to natural disasters;

246. Encourages Member States, relevant United Nations organizations and international financial institu-   A/RES/69/243, op49 (2014)
                                                                                                            Cooperation in Natural Disasters
     tions to enhance the global capacity for sustainable post-disaster recovery in areas such as coordi-   See also: Cooperation in Natural Disasters
     nation with traditional and non-traditional partners, identification an dissemination of lessons         A/RES/68/103, op28 (2013)
                                                                                                              A/RES/67/231, op25 (2012)
     learned, development of common tools and mechanisms for recovery needs assessment,                       A/RES/66/277, op23 (2011)

     strategy development and programming, and incorporation of risk reduction into all recov-
     ery processes, and welcomes the ongoing efforts to this end;




                                                                                                            85 | REFERENCE GUIDE / 2015
247. Encourages Member States, regional organizations, the United Nations and humanitarian and develop-      A/RES/69/2643 op33 (2014)
                                                                                                             Cooperation in Natural Disasters
     ment organizations to continue to improve the identification, mapping and analysis of risks and         See also: Cooperation in Natural Disasters
     vulnerabilities, including the local impact of future disaster risk drivers, and the develop-             A/RES/68/103, op32 (2013)

     ment and implementation of appropriate strategies and programmes to address them, and in
     this regard encourages all the relevant stakeholders to support Governments in capacity development,
     including at the regional and local levels, through the sharing of expertise and tools and the provi-
     sion of necessary resources, as appropriate, to ensure that effective disaster management plans and
     capacities are in place in accordance with national priorities for disaster risk management;

Dispositions addressed to the United Nations and/or the humanitarian system in general

248. Emergency assistance must be provided in ways that will be supportive of recovery and long-term         A/RES/46/182, op40 (1991)
                                                                                                             Strengthening Coordination
     development. Development assistance organizations of the United Nations system should be
     involved at an early stage and should collaborate closely with those responsible for emer-
     gency relief and recovery, within their existing mandates;

249. Encourages members of the Inter-Agency Standing Committee to cooperate closely with each                A/RES/51/194, op8 (1996)
                                                                                                             Strengthening Coordination
     other, as well as with the Bretton Woods institutions and the regional development banks, to ensure
     that relief, rehabilitation, reconstruction and long-term development is addressed in a
     more effective manner, taking into account the need for a clearer division of responsibilities
     between different actors;

250. Urges the United Nations system to strengthen and align its existing planning tools such as the         E/2002/32, op12
                                                                                                             ECOSOC Strengthening Coordination
     consolidated appeals process and, where they exist, common country assessments and the
     United Nations Development Frameworks in order to facilitate the transition from relief to
     development and better reflect disaster risk management;

                                                                                                             86 | REFERENCE GUIDE / 2015
251. Calls upon the relevant humanitarian and development organizations of the United Nations system,          A/RES/57/153, op7 (2002)
                                                                                                               Strengthening Coordination
     other relevant international organizations, including the Bretton Woods institutions, Governments and
     non-governmental organizations to review and work towards greater alignment of their plan-
     ning and resource mobilization tools so as to facilitate the transition from relief to develop-
     ment, and to report to the Secretary-General on actions taken in this respect;

252. Invites the United Nations system to explore further the concept of transitional recovery teams for       A/RES/57/152, op18 (2002)
                                                                                                               Cooperation in Natural Disasters
     providing assistance for bridging relief assistance and development cooperation;                          See also: Cooperation in Natural Disasters
                                                                                                                 A/RES/56/103, op19 (2001)


253. Encourages efforts to enhance cooperation and coordination of United Nations humanitarian entities,       E/2014/13, op11
                                                                                                               ECOSOC Strengthening Coordination
     other relevant humanitarian organizations and donor countries with the affected State, with a view        See also: Strengthening Coordination
     to planning and delivering emergency humanitarian assistance in ways that are supportive                    A/RES/67/87, op19 (2012)
                                                                                                                 A/RES/66/119, op15 (2011)
     of early recovery as well as sustainable rehabilitation, reconstruction and development                     A/RES/65/133, op13 (2010)
                                                                                                                 A/RES/63/76, op12 (2009)
     efforts;                                                                                                    A/RES/63/139, op11 (2008)
                                                                                                               See also: ECOSOC Strengthening Coordination
                                                                                                                 E/2011/8, op7
                                                                                                                 E/2010/1, op6
                                                                                                                 E/2009/3, op6


254. Welcomes the growing number of initiatives undertaken at the regional and national levels to promote      A/RES/69/243, op8 (2014)
                                                                                                               Cooperation in Natural Disasters
     the implementation of the Guidelines for the Domestic Facilitation and Regulation of Inter-               See also: ECOSOC Strengthening Coordination
     national Disaster Relief and Initial Recovery Assistance, encourages Member States and,                     E/2014/13, op10
                                                                                                                 E/2013/6, op5
     where applicable, regional organizations to take further steps to review and strengthen                   Cooperation in Natural Disasters
     operational and legal frameworks for international disaster relief, taking into account the                 A/RES/68/103, op8 (2013)
                                                                                                                 A/RES/67/231, op7 (2012)
                                                                                                 [continues]     A/RES/66/277, op7 (2011)
                                                                                                                                          [cont]



                                                                                                               87 | REFERENCE GUIDE / 2015
                                                                                                                   [cont]
[cont]   Guidelines, as appropriate, and welcomes the valuable support that national Red Cross and Red Cres-
                                                                                                                   Strengthening Coordination
         cent societies are providing to their Governments in this area, in collaboration with the International      A/RES/69/135, op22 (2014)
                                                                                                                      A/RES/68/102, op20 (2013)
         Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies, the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian          A/RES/67/87, op 17 (2012)
         Affairs of the Secretariat and other partners;                                                               A/RES/66/119, op13 (2011)


255. Also welcomes the effective cooperation among the affected States, relevant bodies of the United              A/RES/69/263, op9 (2014)
                                                                                                                   Cooperation in Natural Disasters
     Nations system, donor countries, regional and international financial institutions and other relevant         See also: Cooperation in Natural Disasters
     organizations, such as the International Red Cross and Red Crescent Movement, and civil society, in             A/RES/68/203, op9 (2013)
                                                                                                                     A/RES/67/231, op8 (2012)
     the coordination and delivery of emergency relief, and stresses the need to continue such coop-                 A/RES/68/103, op8 (2011)

     eration and delivery throughout relief operations and medium- and long-term rehabilitation
     and reconstruction efforts, in a manner that reduces vulnerability to future hazards;

256. Requests the United Nations system to improve its coordination of disaster recovery efforts to ensure         A/RES/65/264, op28 (2011)
                                                                                                                   Cooperation in Natural Disasters
     continuity and predictability in their response and to further improve coordination in recovery               See also: Cooperation in Natural Disasters
     processes in support of the efforts of national authorities;                                                    A/RES/64/251, op26 (2010)
                                                                                                                     A/RES/63/141, op20 (2008)
                                                                                                                     A/RES/62/92, op18 (2007)
                                                                                                                     A/RES/61/131, op19 (2006)
                                                                                                                     A/RES/60/125, op18 (2005)


257. Calls upon relevant United Nations humanitarian and development organizations to continue efforts to          A/RES/69/243, op42 (2014)
                                                                                                                   Cooperation in Natural Disasters
     ensure continuity and predictability in their response and to further improve coordination in recov-          See also: Cooperation in Natural Disasters
     ery processes in support of efforts of national authorities;                                                    A/RES/68/203, op39 (2013)
                                                                                                                     A/RES/67/231, op33 (2012)
                                                                                                                     A/RES/68/103, op30 (2011)




                                                                                                                   88 | REFERENCE GUIDE / 2015
258. Calls upon relevant United Nations humanitarian and development organizations, in consultation with      A/RES/69/263, op42 (2014)
                                                                                                              Cooperation in Natural Disasters
     Member States, to strengthen tools and mechanisms to ensure that early recovery needs and                See also: Cooperation in Natural Disasters
     support are integrated into the planning and implementation of disaster preparedness, humanitarian         A/RES/68/264, op39 (2013)
                                                                                                                A/RES/67/26, op33 (2012)
     response and development cooperation activities, as appropriate;                                           A/RES/66/264, op30 (2011)


259. Encourages the United Nations, humanitarian and development organizations to work towards a com-         A/RES/69/243, op45 (2014)
                                                                                                              Cooperation in Natural Disasters
     mon understanding of underlying risks, clarify roles and responsibilities according to respec-
     tive mandates and establish joint objectives and programmes to strengthen coordination and coher-
     ence among short-, medium- and long-term activities;

260. Encourages the United Nations and humanitarian organizations, together with development organiza-        E/2014/13, op 5 (2014)
                                                                                                              ECOSOC Strengthening Coordination
     tions, to continue to support national leadership in building in-country preparedness capacity,
     including under the Common Framework for Capacity Development for Emergency Prepar-
     edness of the Inter-Agency Standing Committee, the United Nations Development Group and the
     United Nations International Strategy for Disaster Reduction;

Dispositions addressed to specific actors
261. Calls upon the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs as well as the United Nations         E/2002/32, op9
                                                                                                              ECOSOC Strengthening Coordination
     Development Programme, in consultation with Governments and the humanitarian and develop-
     ment community, with the support of international financial institutions where appropriate, to develop
     humanitarian strategies to support the engagement of local communities and institutions as
     a means of supporting humanitarian assistance activities and the transition from relief to
     development;



                                                                                                              89 | REFERENCE GUIDE / 2015
262. Emphasizes the need for a more inclusive dialogue with States on the complex issue of transition               E/2004/50, op43
                                                                                                                    ECOSOC Strengthening Coordination
     from relief to development, and requests the Secretary-General to submit a report to the General
     Assembly, through the Economic and Social Council, taking into account the range of views expressed by
     States at the Council’s event to discuss the issue of transition from relief to development, held during its
     substantive session of 2004, and with the participation of United Nations entities, including the United
     Nations Development Group and Executive Committee on Humanitarian Affairs, with the aim
     of improving the international community’s efforts to respond better to transition situations, in
     support of affected States, bearing in mind the uniqueness of each transition situation;




                                                                                                                    90 | REFERENCE GUIDE / 2015
                                III.   TOOLS AND MECHANISMS
                                       FOR COORDINATION




91   | REFERENCE GUIDE / 2015
10.    Emergency Relief Coordinator (ERC) and Humanitarian Leadership
REFERENCE                                                                                                          LEGISLATIVE DECISION

Overarching principles, policies and guidelines
263. The leadership role of the Secretary-General is critical and must be strengthened to ensure better            A/RES/46/182, op33 (1991)
                                                                                                                   Strengthening Coordination
     preparation for, as well as rapid and coherent response to, natural disasters and other emergencies.
     This should be achieved through coordinated support for prevention and preparedness measures and
     the optimal utilization of, inter alia, an inter-agency standing committee, consolidated appeals, a central
     emergency revolving fund and a register of stand-by capacities;
264. To this end, and on the understanding that the requisite resources envisaged in paragraph 24 above            A/RES/46/182, op34 (1991)
                                                                                                                   Strengthening Coordination
     would be provided, a high-level official (emergency relief coordinator) would be designated by the
     Secretary-General to work closely with and with direct access to him, in cooperation with the relevant
     organizations and entities of the system dealing with humanitarian assistance and in full respect of
     their mandates, without prejudice to any decisions to be taken by the General Assembly on the overall
     restructuring of the Secretariat of the United Nations. This high-level official should combine the func-
     tions at present carried out in the coordination of United Nations response by representatives of the
     Secretary-General for major and complex emergencies, as well as by the United Nations Disaster Relief
     Coordinator;




                                                                                                                   92 | REFERENCE GUIDE / 2015
Dispositions addressed to Member States
265. Encourages Governments, in particular through their disaster management or response agencies, as           A/RES/55/163, op10 (2000)
                                                                                                                Cooperation in Natural Disasters
     appropriate, relevant organizations of the United Nations system and non-governmental organizations        See also: Cooperation in Natural Disasters
     to cooperate with the Secretary-General and the Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs and         A/RES/54/233, op11 (1999)

     Emergency Relief Coordinator to maximize the effectiveness of the international response to natural
     disasters, based, inter alia, on humanitarian need, from relief to development, and also to maximize the
     effectiveness of disaster preparedness and mitigation efforts at all levels;
Dispositions addressed to the United Nations and/or the humanitarian system in general
266. The United Nations has a central and unique role to play in providing leadership and coordinating          A/RES/46/182, op12 (1991)
                                                                                                                Strengthening Coordination
     the efforts of the international community to support the affected countries. The United Nations
     should ensure the prompt and smooth delivery of relief assistance in full respect of the above mentioned
     humanitarian principles;
267. Encourages the United Nations system and other relevant humanitarian and development actors to sup-        A/RES/69/243, op48 (2014)
                                                                                                                Coordination of Natural Disasters
     port humanitarian coordinators and resident coordinators, in order to strengthen their capacity,           See also: Cooperation of Natural Disasters
     inter alia, to support the host Government in implementing preparedness measures and to coordinate           A/RES/68/103, op42 (2013)
                                                                                                                  A/RES/67/231, op36 (2012)
     preparedness activities of country teams in support of national efforts, and encourages the United           A/RES/66/277, op32 (2011)
     Nations system and other relevant humanitarian actors to further strengthen the ability to quickly and
     flexibly deploy humanitarian professionals to support Governments and country teams in the
     immediate aftermath of a disaster;




                                                                                                                93 | REFERENCE GUIDE / 2015
268. Requests the Secretary-General to report on actions taken to enable the United Nations to continue to        A/RES/69/135, op52 (2014)
                                                                                                                  Strengthening Coordination
     strengthen its ability to recruit and deploy staff quickly, effectively and flexibly, to procure             See also: Strengthening Coordination
     emergency relief materials and services rapidly, cost-effectively and locally, where applicable,               A/RES/68/102, op44 (2013)
                                                                                                                    A/RES/67/87, op40 (2012)
     and to quickly disburse funds in order to support Governments and United Nations country teams in the          A/RES/66/119, op35 (2011)
     coordination of international humanitarian assistance;
Dispositions addressed to specific actors
269. The Emergency Relief Coordinator, under the aegis of the General Assembly and working under the direc-       A/RES/46/182, op35 (1991)
                                                                                                                  Strengthening Coordination
     tion of the Secretary-General, would have the following responsibilities:
      (a) Processing requests from affected member states for emergency assistance requiring a coor-
      dinated response;
      (b) Maintaining an overview of all emergencies through, inter alia, the systematic pooling and
      analysis of early warning information as envisaged in paragraph 19 above, with a view to coordinating
      and facilitating the humanitarian assistance of the United Nations system to those emergencies that
      require a coordinated response;
      (c) Organizing, in consultation with the Government of the affected country, a joint inter-agency needs
      assessment mission and preparing a consolidated appeal to be issued by the Secretary-General,
      to be followed by periodic situation reports including information on all sources of external assistance;
      (d) Actively facilitating, including through negotiation if needed, the access by the operational
      organizations to emergency areas for the rapid provision of emergency assistance by obtaining the con-
      sent of all parties concerned, through modalities such as the establishment of temporary relief corridors
      where needed, days and zones of tranquillity and other forms;


                                                                                                                  94 | REFERENCE GUIDE / 2015
      (e) Managing, in consultation with the operational organizations concerned, the central emergency
      revolving fund and assisting in the mobilization of resources;
      (f) Serving as a central focal point with governments, intergovernmental and non-governmental organi-
      zations concerning United Nations emergency relief operations and, when appropriate and necessary,
      mobilizing their emergency relief capacities, including through consultations and in his capacity as
      chairman of the Inter-Agency Standing Committee;
      (g) Providing consolidated information, including early warning on emergencies, to all inter-
      ested governments and concerned authorities, particularly affected and disaster-prone countries, draw-
      ing on the capacities of the organizations of the system and other available sources; and
      (h) Actively promoting, in close collaboration with concerned organizations, the smooth transition from
      relief to rehabilitation and reconstruction as relief operations under his aegis are phased out;
      (i) Preparing an annual report for the Secretary-General on the coordination of humanitarian emergency
      assistance, including information on the central emergency revolving fund, to be submitted to the Gen-
      eral Assembly through the Economic and Social Council;
270. The high-level official [Emergency Relief Coordinator] should work closely with organizations and enti-    A/RES/46/182, op36 (1991)
                                                                                                                Strengthening Coordination
     ties of the United Nations system, as well as the International Committee of the Red Cross, the League
     of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies, the International Organization for Migration and relevant
     non-governmental organizations. At the country level, the Emergency Relief Coordinator would main-
     tain close contact with and provide leadership to the resident coordinators on matters relating to
     humanitarian assistance;




                                                                                                                95 | REFERENCE GUIDE / 2015
271. Emphasizes the leadership role of the Secretary-General, through the Emergency Relief Coordina-             A/RES/48/57, op3 (1993)
                                                                                                                 Strengthening Coordination
     tor and working closely with him, in coordinating a coherent and timely response to humanitarian
     emergencies;
272. Stresses the importance of the Emergency Relief Coordinator participating fully in the overall United       A/RES/48/57, op18 (1993)
                                                                                                                 Strengthening Coordination
     Nations planning of responses to emergencies in order to serve as the humanitarian advocate in
     ensuring that the humanitarian dimension, particularly the principles of humanity, neutrality, and impar-
     tiality of relief assistance, is taken fully into account;
273. The Emergency Relief Coordinator, in cooperation with the Division of the Advancement of Women of the       E/1998/1, op8
                                                                                                                 ECOSC Strengthening Coordination
     United Nations Secretariat, should ensure that a gender perspective is fully integrated into humanitar-
     ian activities and policies;
274. Supports the efforts of the Emergency Relief Coordinator to engage in a dialogue with other humanitar-      E/2002/32, op16
                                                                                                                 ECOSOC Strengthening Coordination
     ian actors, including non-governmental organizations, on strengthening their involvement in the devel-
     opment of common humanitarian action plans and consolidated appeals, and encourages them
     to contribute actively to their implementation;
275. Reaffirms the leadership role of the United Nations Emergency Relief Coordinator in supporting the          A/RES/57/150, op6 (2002)
                                                                                                                 INSARAG
     authorities of the affected State, upon their request, in coordinating multilateral assistance in the
     aftermath of disasters;




                                                                                                                 96 | REFERENCE GUIDE / 2015
276. Recognizes the role of the Emergency Relief Coordinator, and calls upon relevant United Nations organi-   E/2003/5, op35
                                                                                                               ECOSOC Strengthening Coordination
     zations as well as other humanitarian actors to enhance the coordination, effectiveness and effi-
     ciency of their humanitarian activities, including by:
      (a) Enhancing their commitment to system-wide coordination both at Headquarters and in the field;
      (b) Strengthening efforts to report on results, activities and financial matters, including to donors,
      in a timely and comprehensive manner, and, where possible, to strive for harmonized reporting, bearing
      in mind specific requirements of donors;
      (c) Developing further methods for monitoring and evaluation, including independent evaluations;
      (d) Maximizing the portion of humanitarian assistance contributions that directly benefits people in
      need;
      (e) Addressing mutual safety and security concerns at the field level;
277. Emphasizes the central role of the Emergency Relief Coordinator for the inter-agency coordination of      A/RES/64/162, op17 (2009)
                                                                                                               Protection of and Assistance to IDPs
     protection of and assistance to internally displaced persons, welcomes continued initiatives              See also: Protection of and Assistance to IDPs
     taken in order to ensure better protection, assistance and development strategies for internally dis-       A/RES/62/153, op16 (2007)
                                                                                                                 A/RES/60/168, op13 (2005)
     placed persons, as well as better coordination of activities regarding them, and emphasizes the need        A/RES/58/177, op12 (2003)
                                                                                                                 A/RES/56/164, op2 (2001)
     to strengthen the capacities of the United Nations organizations and other relevant actors to meet the
     immense humanitarian challenges of internal displacement;




                                                                                                               97 | REFERENCE GUIDE / 2015
278. Requests the Emergency Relief Coordinator to continue to lead the efforts to strengthen the coor-             A/RES/69/135, op2 (2014)
                                                                                                                   Strengthening Coordination
     dination and accountability of humanitarian assistance, including through the transformative                  See also: Strengthening Coordination
     agenda of the Inter-Agency Standing Committee, and calls upon relevant United Nations and other rel-            A/RES/68/102, op2 (2013)
                                                                                                                     A/RES/67/87, op 2 (2012)
     evant intergovernmental organizations, as well as other humanitarian and relevant development actors,           A/RES/66/119, op 2 (2011)
                                                                                                                     A/RES/65/133, op2 (2010)
     including civil society, to continue to work with the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs       A/RES/64/76, op2 (2009)
     of the Secretariat to enhance the coordination, effectiveness and efficiency of humanitarian                  ECOSOC Strengthening Coordination
                                                                                                                     E/2014/13, op12
     assistance;                                                                                                     E/2013/6, op8
                                                                                                                     E/2012/6, op10
                                                                                                                     E/2011/8, op9

279. Reaffirms the important role of the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs of the Sec-           A/RES/69/243, op21 (2014)
                                                                                                                   Cooperation in Natural Disasters
     retariat as the focal point within the overall United Nations system for advocacy for and coordination        See also: Cooperation in Natural Disasters
     of humanitarian assistance among United Nations humanitarian organizations and other humanitar-                 A/RES/68/103, op20 (2013)
                                                                                                                     A/RES/67/231, op17 (2012)
     ian partners;                                                                                                   A/RES/66/277, op17 (2011)
                                                                                                                     A/RES/64/251, op16 (2010)
                                                                                                                     A/RES/63/141, op13 (2008)
                                                                                                                     A/RES/62/92, op10 (2007)

280. Calls upon the Chair of the United Nations Development Group and the Emergency Relief Coordinator             A/RES/69/135, op11 (2014)
                                                                                                                   Strengthening Coordination
     to continue enhancing their consultations before presenting final recommendations on the selection pro-       See also: Strengthening Coordination
     cess for resident coordinators in countries likely to require significant humanitarian response operations;     A/RES/68/102, op10 (2013)
                                                                                                                     A/RES/67/87, op9 (2012)
                                                                                                                     A/RES/66/119, op7 (2011)




                                                                                                                   98 | REFERENCE GUIDE / 2015
11.    Inter-Agency Standing Committee (IASC)
REFERENCE                                                                                                     LEGISLATIVE DECISION

Overarching principles, policies and guidelines
281. An inter-agency standing committee serviced by a strengthened office of the United Nations               A/RES/46/182, op38 (1991)
                                                                                                              Strengthening Coordination
     Disaster Relief Coordinator [OCHA] should be established under the chairmanship of the high-level
     official [Emergency Relief Coordinator] with the participation of all operational organizations and
     with a standing invitation to the International Committee of the Red Cross, the League of Red Cross
     and Red Crescent Societies and the International Organization for Migration. Relevant non-governmental
     organizations can be invited to participate on an ad hoc basis. The committee should meet as soon as
     possible in response to emergencies;
282. Also stresses in this regard, that the Inter-Agency Standing Committee, under the leadership of the      A/RES/48/57, op6 (1993)
                                                                                                              Strengthening Coordination
     Emergency Relief Coordinator, should serve as the primary mechanism for inter-agency coordina-           See also: Strengthening Coordination
     tion, meet more frequently and act therefore in an action-oriented manner on policy issues related to      A/RES/49/139, op5 (1994)
                                                                                                              ECOSOC Strengthening Coordination
     humanitarian assistance and for formulating a coherent and timely United Nations response to major         E/1993/1, op16
     and complex emergencies;
283. All members of the Inter-Agency Standing Committee are responsible for the effective functioning         E/1993/1, op16
                                                                                                              ECOSOC Strengthening Coordination
     of the structure of the committee. It should be action-oriented and meet frequently;




                                                                                                              99 | REFERENCE GUIDE / 2015
284. Also requests the Emergency Relief Coordinator to continue to improve dialogue with all Member                A/RES/69/135, op2 (2014)
                                                                                                                   Strengthening Coordination
     States on the relevant processes, activities and deliberations of the Inter-Agency Standing Committee;        See also: Strengthening Coordination
                                                                                                                     A/RES/68/102, op3 (2013)
                                                                                                                     A/RES/67/87, op3 (2012)
                                                                                                                     A/RES/66/119, op3 (2011)
                                                                                                                   ECOSOC Strengthening Coordination
                                                                                                                     E/2014/13, op13
                                                                                                                     E/2013/6, op9
                                                                                                                     E/2012/6, op10

Dispositions addressed to Member States
285. The Council [ECOSOC] stresses the importance of ensuring an overall accountability of humanitarian            E/1998/1, op20
                                                                                                                   ECOSOC Strengthening Coordination
     actors. It supports the development by IASC of a field-based system for strategic monitoring which will
     help assess how programme targets and strategic objectives are being met;
Dispositions addressed to the United Nations and/or the humanitarian system in general
286. Also requests the Inter-Agency Standing Committee to provide recommendations on issues related                A/RES/48/57, op13
                                                                                                                   Strengthening Coordination
     to field coordination, including measures taken to assign clear responsibilities at an early stage of an
     emergency, in particular by entrusting the primary responsibility to the operational agencies, as appropri-
     ate, and on standardized procedures for joint emergency needs assessment missions, under the
     overall leadership and coordination of the Emergency Relief Coordinator;
287. Encourages Members of the Inter-Agency Standing Committee to cooperate closely with each other, as            A/RES/51/194, op8 (1996)
                                                                                                                   Strengthening Coordination
     well as with the Bretton Woods institutions and the regional development banks, to ensure that relief,
     rehabilitation, reconstruction and long-term development is addressed in a more effective man-
     ner, taking into account the need for a clearer division of responsibilities between different actors;


                                                                                                                   100 | REFERENCE GUIDE / 2015
288. Encourages all relevant United Nations agencies and humanitarian assistance, human rights and devel-          A/RES/58/177, op14 (2003)
                                                                                                                   Protection of and Assistance to IDPs
     opment organizations to enhance further their collaboration and coordination, through the Inter-
     Agency Standing Committee and in countries with situations of internal displacement, and to provide
     all possible assistance and support to the Representative of the Secretary-General;
289. Encourages all relevant United Nations organizations and humanitarian assistance, human rights and            A/RES/64/162, op18 (2009)
                                                                                                                   Protection of and Assistance to IDPs
     development organizations to enhance their collaboration and coordination, through the Inter-Agency           See also: Protection of and Assistance to IDPs
     Standing Committee and United Nations country teams in countries with situations of internal dis-               A/RES/62/153, op18 (2007)
                                                                                                                     A/RES/60/168, op15 (2005)
     placement, and to provide all possible assistance and support to the Representative of the Secretary-           A/RES/58/177, op14 (2003)
     General, and requests the continued participation of the Representative in the work of the Inter-Agency
     Standing Committee and its subsidiary bodies;
290. Recognizes the relevance of the global database on internally displaced persons advocated by the              A/RES/64/162, op21 (2009)
                                                                                                                   Protection of and Assistance to IDPs
     Representative of the Secretary-General, and encourages the members of the Inter-Agency Standing              See also: Protection of and Assistance to IDPs
     Committee and Governments to continue to collaborate on and support this effort, including by providing         A/RES/62/153, op20 (2007)
                                                                                                                     A/RES/60/168, op17 (2005)
     financial resources and relevant data on situations of internal displacement;                                   A/RES/58/177, op16 (2003)

291. Recognizes the benefits for the effectiveness of the humanitarian response of the engagement of and           E/2014/13, op19
                                                                                                                   ECOSOC Strengthening Coordination
     coordination with relevant humanitarian actors, and welcomes in this regard the ongoing efforts by the        See also: Strengthening Coordination
     Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs to build partnerships with regional organizations and       A/RES/69/135, op9 (2014)
                                                                                                                     A/RES/68/102, op8 (2013)
     the private sector, encourages Member States and the United Nations system to continue to strengthen            A/RES/67/87, op 7 (2012)
                                                                                                                     A/RES/66/119, op5 (2011)
     partnerships at the global, regional, national and local levels in support of national efforts,                 A/RES/65/133, op4 (2010)
     which can cooperate effectively to provide humanitarian assistance to those in need and ensure that             A/RES/64/76, op4 (2009)
                                                                                                                     A/RES/63/139, op4 (2008)
     their collaborative efforts adhere to the principles of neutrality, humanity, impartiality and independ-        A/RES/62/94, op3 (2007)
                                                                                                                     A/RES/61/134, op8 (2006)
     ence, and also encourages the United Nations system to continue to pursue efforts to continue to pursue                                  [cont]
                                                                                                     [continues]

                                                                                                                   101 | REFERENCE GUIDE / 2015
[cont]   efforts to strengthen partnerships at the global level with the International Red Cross and Red         [cont]
                                                                                                                 ECOSOC Strengthening Coordination
         Crescent Movement, relevant humanitarian non-governmental organizations and other participants in         E/2013/6, op15
         the Inter-Agency Standing Committee;                                                                      E/2012/3, op15 and op16
                                                                                                                   E/2011/8, op15
                                                                                                                   E/2010/1, op16
                                                                                                                   E/2009/3, op15
                                                                                                                   E/2008/36, op7

Dispositions addressed to specific actors
292. Calls upon the Secretary-General to ensure that the Inter-Agency Standing Committee, as a contribution      A/RES/51/194, op3 (1996)
                                                                                                                 Strengthening Coordination
     to the report of the Secretary-General to the Economic and Social Council at its substantive session
     in 1997, develops options and proposals to further define operational responsibilities between
     its members, drawing on their respective mandates, expertise, strengths and available capabilities,
     to identify cooperative arrangements to strengthen their joint capacities and to strengthen its work in
     priority setting and formulation of coherent humanitarian strategies;
                                                                                                                 A/RES/69/135, op2 (2014)
293. Requests the Emergency Relief Coordinator to continue to lead the efforts to strengthen the coor-           Strengthening Coordination
     dination and accountability of humanitarian assistance, including through the transformative                See also: Strengthening Coordination
                                                                                                                   A/RES/68/102, op2 (2013)
     agenda of the Inter-Agency Standing Committee, and calls upon relevant United Nations and other rel-          A/RES/67/87, op 2 (2012)
                                                                                                                   A/RES/66/119, op 2 (2011)
     evant intergovernmental organizations, as well as other humanitarian and relevant development actors,         A/RES/65/133, op2 (2010)
     including civil society, to continue to work with the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs     A/RES/64/76, op2 (2009)
                                                                                                                   A/RES/63/139, op2 (2008)
     of the Secretariat to enhance the coordination, effectiveness and efficiency of humanitarian                  A/RES/62/94, op2 (2007)
                                                                                                                   A/RES/61/134, op2 (2006)
     assistance;                                                                                                   A/RES/60/124, op8 (2005)
                                                                                                                   A/RES/59/141, op2 (2004)
                                                                                                                 ECOSOC Strengthening Coordination
                                                                                                                   E/2014/13, op12
                                                                                                                   E/2013/6, op8
                                                                                                                   E/2012/6, op10
                                                                                                                   E/2011/8, op9
                                                                                                                   E/2010/1, op8
                                                                                                                   E/2009/3, op8
                                                                                                                 102 | REFERENCE GUIDE / 2015
12.    Humanitarian Financing, including the Central Emergency Response Fund (CERF)
REFERENCE                                                                                                        LEGISLATIVE DECISION

Overarching principles, policies and guidelines
294. In addition, there is a need for a complementary central funding mechanism to ensure the provision          A/RES/46/182, op22 (1991)
                                                                                                                 Strengthening Coordination
     of adequate resources for use in the initial phase of emergencies that require a system-wide response;
295. To that end, the Secretary-General should establish under his authority a central emergency revolv-         A/RES/46/182, op23 (1991)
                                                                                                                 Strengthening Coordination
     ing fund [CERF] as a cash-flow mechanism to ensure the rapid and coordinated response of
     the organizations of the system;
296. This fund should be put into operation with an amount of 50 million United States dollars. The fund is      A/RES/46/182, op24 (1991)
                                                                                                                 Strengthening Coordination
     financed by voluntary contributions. The fund should be financed by voluntary contributions. Consulta-
     tions among potential donors should be held to this end. To achieve this target, the Secretary-General
     should launch an appeal to potential donors and convene a meeting of those donors in the first quarter of
     1992 to secure contributions to the fund on an assured, broad-based and additional basis;
297. Encourage s better use of the Revolving Fund [CERF], and in that context endorses the proposal of the       A/RES/56/107, op7 (2001)
                                                                                                                 Strengthening Coordination
     Secretary-General to expand the utilization of the Fund to include humanitarian assistance for
     natural disasters, humanitarian assistance for new requirements in protracted emergencies
     and emergency staff safety arrangements for United Nations and associated personnel;
298. Decides to raise the maximum limit of an emergency cash grant to 100,000 United States dollars per          A/RES/59/141, op7 (2004)
                                                                                                                 Strengthening Coordination
     country in the case of any one disaster, within existing resources available from the regular budget of
     the United Nations;

                                                                                                                 103 | REFERENCE GUIDE / 2015
299. Decides to upgrade the current Central Emergency Revolving Fund into the Central Emergency                 A/RES/60/124, op15 (2005)
                                                                                                                Strengthening Coordination
     Response Fund by including a grant element based on voluntary contributions, to be replenished at
     regular intervals, so as to ensure a more predictable and timely response to humanitarian emergencies,
     with the objectives of promoting early action and response to reduce loss of life, enhancing response
     to time-critical requirements and strengthening core elements of humanitarian response in underfunded
     crises, based on demonstrable needs and on priorities identified in consultation with the affected State
     as appropriate;
300. Welcomes the achievements of the Central Emergency Response Fund and its contribution to the promo-        A/RES/69/243, op51 (2014)
                                                                                                                Cooperation in Natural Disasters
     tion and enhancement of early humanitarian response, calls upon all Member States, and invites             See also: Cooperation in Natural Disasters
     the private sector and all concerned individuals and institutions, to consider increasing voluntary con-     A/RES/68/103, op44 (2013)
                                                                                                                  A/RES/67/231, op38 (2012)
     tributions to the Fund, including, when possible, through multi-year and early commitments, and              A/RES/66/277, op34 (2011)
                                                                                                                  Strengthening Coordination
     emphasizes that contributions should be additional to current commitments to humanitarian program-           A/RES/69/135, op41 (2014)
     ming and not to the detriment of resources made available for international cooperation for development;     A/RES/68/102, op34 (2013)
                                                                                                                  A/RES/67/87, op31 (2012)
                                                                                                                  A/RES/66/119, op 27 (2011)
                                                                                                                  A/RES/65/133, op20 (2010)
                                                                                                                  A/RES/64/76, op19 (2009)

301. Welcomes the important achievements of the Central Emergency Response Fund in ensuring a more              A/RES/69/135, op40 (2014)
                                                                                                                Strengthening Coordination
     timely and predictable response to humanitarian emergencies, stresses the importance of continuing         See also: Strengthening Coordination
     to improve the functioning of the Fund, and in this regard encourages the United Nations funds, pro-         A/RES/68/102, op34 (2013)
                                                                                                                  A/RES/67/87, op30 (2012)
     grammes and specialized agencies to review and evaluate, where necessary, their partnership                  A/RES/66/119, op 24 (2011)
     policies and practices in order to ensure the timely disbursement of funds from the Fund to
     implementing partners in order to ensure that resources are used in the most efficient, effective,
     accountable and transparent manner possible;


                                                                                                                104 | REFERENCE GUIDE / 2015
302. Emphasizes the need to mobilize adequate, flexible and sustainable resources for recovery, pre-              A/RES/69/243, op50 (2014)
                                                                                                                  Cooperation in Natural Disasters
     paredness and disaster risk reduction activities in order to ensure predictable and timely access to         See also: Cooperation in Natural Disasters
     resources for humanitarian assistance in emergencies resulting from disasters associated with natural          A/RES/68/103, op43 (2013)
                                                                                                                    A/RES/67/231, op37 (2012)
     hazard;                                                                                                        A/RES/66/277, op33 (2011)
                                                                                                                    A/RES/65/264, op34 (2010)
                                                                                                                    A/RES/64/251, op32 (2009)
                                                                                                                    A/RES/63/141, op24 (2008)

303. Notes the increasing challenges facing both Member States, in particular developing countries, and           E/2014/13, op20 (2014)
                                                                                                                  ECOSOC Strengthening Coordination
     the international humanitarian response system in responding effectively to all humanitarian emergen-        See also: ECOSOC Strengthening Coordination
     cies, in particular the underfunded and forgotten emergencies, and in that regard stresses the need to         E/2011/8, op28

     enhance existing and build new partnerships, strengthen financing mechanisms, broaden
     the donor base and engage other partners to ensure adequate resources for the provision of
     humanitarian assistance;
304. Emphasizes the need to promote and strengthen disaster preparedness activities at all levels, in par-        A/RES/69/243, op4 (2014)
                                                                                                                  Cooperation in Natural Disasters
     ticular in hazard-prone areas, and encourages Member States, the United Nations system and other             See also: Cooperation in Natural Disasters
     relevant humanitarian and development actors to increase funding and cooperation for disaster                  A/RES/68/103, op4 (2013)
                                                                                                                    A/RES/67/231, op4 (2012)
     risk reduction activities, including disaster preparedness;                                                    A/RES/66/277, op4 (2011)

Dispositions addressed to Member States
305. Calls upon potential donors to adopt the necessary measures to increase and expedite their contri-           A/RES/47/168, op4 (1992)
                                                                                                                  Strengthening Coordination
     butions, including setting aside, on a stand-by basis, financial and other resources that can be disbursed
     quickly to the United Nations system in response to the consolidated appeals of the Secretary-General;




                                                                                                                  105 | REFERENCE GUIDE / 2015
306. Encourages the donor community to provide humanitarian assistance in proportion to needs and on                E/2003/5, op39
                                                                                                                    ECOSOC Strengthening Coordination
     the basis of needs assessments, with a view to ensuring a more equitable distribution of humanitar-            See also: ECOSOC Strengthening Coordination
     ian assistance across humanitarian emergencies, including those of a protracted nature, as well as fuller        E/2006/5, op21
                                                                                                                      E/2004/50, op41
     coverage of the needs of all sectors;
307. Encourages donors to consider taking steps to harmonize reporting requirements, based on United                E/2003/5, op41
                                                                                                                    ECOSOC Strengthening Coordination
     Nations standards for financial reporting, as well as to enhance reporting to the financial tracking system;
308. Encourages the donor community to provide humanitarian assistance in proportion to needs and on the            E/2004/50, op42
                                                                                                                    ECOSOC Strengthening Coordination
     basis of needs assessments, with a view to ensuring a more equitable distribution of humanitarian              See also: ECOSOC Strengthening Coordination
     assistance across humanitarian emergencies, including those of a protracted nature, as well as fuller            E/2006/5, op21
                                                                                                                      E/2003/5, op40
     coverage of the needs of all sectors, and to this end requests the United Nations organizations, includ-
     ing, through the United Nations country teams, to continue developing and applying transparent needs
     assessment mechanisms;
309. Recognizes the importance of secure and predictable funding to the coordinated, appropriate and timely         A/RES/59/141, op3 (2004)
                                                                                                                    Strengthening Coordination
     delivery of humanitarian assistance, stresses the need to increase in an incremental way, in the normal
     course of the budget process, the share of the budget of the Office for the Coordination of Humani-
     tarian Affairs borne by the regular budget of the United Nations, and requests the Secretary-General
     to give this matter full consideration;
310. Encourages the international community to improve its response to humanitarian emergencies, including          A/RES/59/171, op7 (2004)
                                                                                                                    NIHO
     those of a protracted nature, including efforts by donors with regard to policies and practices of good
     donorship;




                                                                                                                    106 | REFERENCE GUIDE / 2015
311. Encourages intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations as well as the private sector to              A/RES/63/147, op4 (2008)
                                                                                                                   NIHO
     assist and support national and international efforts to respond to humanitarian challenges and to            See also: NIHO
     alleviate human suffering;                                                                                      A/RES/59/171, op8 (2004)
                                                                                                                     A/RES/57/184, op7 (2002)

312. Encourages Member States, relevant humanitarian organizations and non -governmental organizations             E/2007/3, op18
                                                                                                                   ECOSOC Strengthening Coordination
     to provide timely and accurate information on contributions and the use of humanitarian funds through         See also: ECOSOC Strengthening Coordination
     the financial tracking service, and requests the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs            E/2006/5, op15, op16
                                                                                                                     E/2002/32, op20
     of the United Nations Secretariat to continue to improve the analysis and reporting of comprehensive
     financial information through the financial tracking service;
313. Invites all Member States to make contributions to humanitarian funding mechanisms, including con-            E/2014/13, op37
                                                                                                                   ECOSOC Strengthening Coordination
     solidated appeals, the Central Emergency Response Fund and other funds, recognizing the importance            See also: ECOSOC Strengthening Coordination
     of providing humanitarian assistance in a manner that is flexible, predictable and, where possible,             E/2007/3, op19

     multi-year and additional, taking note of chronically underfunded emergencies;
314. Calls upon donors to provide adequate, timely, predictable and flexible resources based on and                A/RES/69/135, op35 (2014)
                                                                                                                   Strengthening Coordination
     in proportion to assessed needs, including for underfunded and forgotten emergencies, to consider             See also: Strengthening Coordination
     providing early and multi-year commitments to pooled humanitarian funds and to continue to sup-                 A/RES/68/102, op31 (2013)
                                                                                                                     A/RES/67/87, op29 (2012)
     port diverse humanitarian funding channels, encourages efforts to adhere to the Principles and                  A/RES/66/119, op23 (2011)
                                                                                                                     A/RES/65/133, op19 (2010)
     Good Practice of Humanitarian Donorship and to improve burden-sharing among donors, and in this                 A/RES/64/76, op18 (2009)
     respect encourages the private sector, civil society and other relevant entities to make relevant contribu-     A/RES/63/139, op15 (2008)
                                                                                                                     A/RES/62/94, op15 (2007)
     tions, complementary to those of other sources;                                                                 A/RES/61/134, op13 (2006)
                                                                                                                     A/RES/60/124, op14 (2005)
                                                                                                                     A/RES/59/141, op20 (2004)
                                                                                                                     A/RES/58/114, op14 (2003)




                                                                                                                   107 | REFERENCE GUIDE / 2015
315. Calls upon all Member States and invites the private sector and all concerned individuals and institu-   A/RES/65/133, op21 (2010)
                                                                                                              Strengthening Coordination
     tions to consider increasing their voluntary contributions to the Central Emergency Response             See also: Strengthening Coordination
     Fund, and emphasizes that contributions should be additional to current commitments to humanitarian        A/RES/64/76, op20 (2009)
                                                                                                                A/RES/63/139, op17 (2008)
     programming and should not be to the detriment of resources made available for international               A/RES/62/94, op17 (2007)
                                                                                                                A/RES/61/134, op16 (2006)
     cooperation for development;                                                                               A/RES/60/124, op20 (2005)
                                                                                                                A/RES/47/168, op3 (1992)
                                                                                                              Cooperation in Natural Disasters
                                                                                                                A/RES/65/264, op35 (2011)
                                                                                                                A/RES/64/251, op33 (2010)
                                                                                                                A/RES/63/141, op26 (2008)

316. Reiterates that the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs should benefit from adequate     A/RES/65/133, op22 (2010)
                                                                                                              Strengthening Coordination
     and more predictable funding, and calls upon all Member States to consider increasing voluntary          See also: Strengthening Coordination
     contributions;                                                                                             A/RES/64/76, op21 (2009)
                                                                                                                A/RES/63/139, op20 (2008)
                                                                                                                A/RES/62/94, op18 (2007)
                                                                                                                A/RES/61/134, op17 (2006)

317. Welcomes the achievements of the Central Emergency Response Fund and its contribution to the pro-        A/RES/69/135, op42 (2014)
                                                                                                              Strengthening Coordination
     motion and enhancement of early humanitarian response, calls upon all Member States, and invites
                                                                                                              See also: Cooperation in Natural Disasters
     the private sector and all concerned individuals and institutions, to consider increasing voluntary        A/RES/68/103, op44 (2013)
                                                                                                                A/RES/67/231, op38 (2012)
     contributions to the Fund, including, when possible, through multi-year and early commitments, and         A/RES/66/277, op38 (2011)
     emphasizes that contributions should be additional to current commitments to humanitarian program-         A/RES/65/264, op36 (2010)
                                                                                                                A/RES/64/251, op34 (2009)
     ming and not to the detriment of resources made available for international cooperation for                A/RES/63/141, op27 (2008)

     development;




                                                                                                              108 | REFERENCE GUIDE / 2015
318. Encourages Member States, the private sector, civil society and other relevant entities to make contribu-   E/2014/13, op37
                                                                                                                 ECOSOC Strengthening Coordination
     tions and consider increasing and diversifying their contributions to humanitarian funding mechanisms,
                                                                                                                 See also: ECOSOC Strengthening Coordination
     including consolidated and flash appeals, the Central Emergency Response Fund and other funds, based          E/2013/6, op33
                                                                                                                   E/2012/3, op33
     on and in proportion to assessed needs, as a means of ensuring flexible, predictable, timely,                 E/2011/8, op29
     needs-based and, where possible, multi-year, non-earmarked and additional resources to meet                   E/2010/1, op23
                                                                                                                   E/2009/3, op21
     global humanitarian challenges, encourages donors to adhere to the principles of good humanitar-              E/2008/36, op16
                                                                                                                   E/2007/3, op10
     ian donorship, and reiterates that contributions for humanitarian assistance should be provided in a way
     which is not to the detriment of resources made available for international cooperation for development;
     recognizes the need for more diversified funding bases, and encourages the United Nations and humanitar-
     ian organizations to consider making further use of multi-year consolidated appeals, as appropriate;
319. Encourages Member States, the United Nations, and humanitarian and development organizations to             A/RES/69/243, op49 (2014)
                                                                                                                 Cooperation in Natural Disasters
     identify ways to improve the current financing architecture to better provide coherent, pre-
     dictable and flexible longer-term funding for risk management in multi-year strategies, in
     particular preparedness, on the basis of a global assessment of risk, allowing for better prioritization
     of resources where the risk is greatest;
320. Recognizes that building preparedness is a long-term investment that will contribute to the achieve-        E/2014/13, op38
                                                                                                                 ECOSOC Strengthening Coordination
     ment of humanitarian and development objectives, including a reduction in the need for humanitarian         See also: ECOSOC Strengthening Coordination
     response, and therefore further encourages Member States, the United Nations system and other                 E/2013/6, op34
                                                                                                                   E/2012/3, op34
     relevant actors to provide effective, predictable, flexible and adequate funding for prepared-
     ness and disaster risk reduction activities, including from humanitarian and development budgets,
     and stresses that international preparedness efforts reinforce and support national and local response
     capacities and institutions;


                                                                                                                 109 | REFERENCE GUIDE / 2015
321. Invites Member States, the private sector and all concerned individuals and institutions to consider     A/RES/69/243, op53 (2014)
                                                                                                              Cooperation in Natural Disasters
     voluntary contributions to other humanitarian funding mechanisms;                                        See also: Cooperation in Natural Disasters
                                                                                                                A/RES/68/103, op46 (2013)
                                                                                                                A/RES/67/231, op32 (2012)
                                                                                                                A/RES/66/277, op35 (2011)

322. Encourages Member States to provide dedicated financial contributions to preparedness,                   A/RES/69/243, op5 (2014)
                                                                                                              Cooperation in Natural Disasters
     response and recovery efforts in a harmonized, flexible and complementary approach that fully uti-       See also: Cooperation in Natural Disasters
     lizes and helps to coordinate humanitarian and development funding options and potential;                  A/RES/68/103, op5 (2013)


323. Encourages Member States and relevant United Nations organizations to examine their own financ-          A/RES/69/135, op25 (2014)
                                                                                                              Strengthening Coordination
     ing mechanisms in order to improve, where possible, fast and flexible financing for preparedness,        See also: Strengthening Coordination
     response and the transition from relief to recovery;                                                       A/RES/68/102, op23 (2013)
                                                                                                                A/RES/67/87, op32 (2012)

324. Encourages Member States to provide humanitarian funding based on, and in accordance with,               A/RES/69/135, op30 (2014)
                                                                                                              Strengthening Coordination
     the humanitarian appeals brought forward by the United Nations;
325. Encourages Member States and relevant United Nations organizations to explore innovative risk-           A/RES/69/135, op31 (2014)
                                                                                                              Strengthening Coordination
     sharing mechanisms and to base risk management funding on objective data;
326. Calls upon all Member States that are in a position to do so to increase their voluntary contributions   A/RES/69/135, op39 (2014)
                                                                                                              Strengthening Coordination
     to humanitarian emergencies, and in this context reiterates that the Office for the Coordination of      See also: Strengthening Coordination
     Humanitarian Affairs should benefit from adequate and more predictable funding;                            A/RES/68/102, op32 (2013)
                                                                                                                A/RES/67/87, op21 (2012)
                                                                                                                A/RES/66/119, op28 (2011)




                                                                                                              110 | REFERENCE GUIDE / 2015
Dispositions addressed to the United Nations and/or the humanitarian system in general
327. Decides also, pending a final decision to be taken by the Economic and Social Council at its substantive   A/RES/48/57, op12 (1993)
                                                                                                                Strengthening Coordination
     session of 1994, on the basis of the recommendations of the Inter-Agency Standing Committee, as well
     as on the experience gained, to authorize, in exceptional circumstances, on a time-bound basis and while
     preserving the revolving nature of the Central Emergency Revolving Fund, [CERF],the Emergency Relief
     Coordinator and relevant operational agencies, under the leadership of the Coordinator, to draw from
     the interest earned by the Revolving Fund [CERF] to enhance rapid response coordination where insuf-
     ficient capacity exists at the field level;
328. Welcomes the continued efforts by the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs to build part-   A/RES/69/135, op5 (2014)
                                                                                                                Strengthening Coordination
     nerships with regional organizations and non-traditional donors and the private sector, and encourages     See also: Cooperation in Natural Disasters
     Member States and the United Nations system to continue to strengthen partnerships at the global,            A/RES/69/243, op25 (2014)
                                                                                                                  A/RES/67/231, op21 (2012)
     regional, national and local levels in support of national efforts in order to effectively cooperate to
     provide humanitarian assistance to those in need and ensure that their collaborative efforts adhere to
     the principles of neutrality, humanity, impartiality and independence;
329. Encourages the United Nations system and humanitarian organizations to continue their efforts to main-     A/RES/69/135, op43 (2014)
                                                                                                                Cooperation in Natural Disasters
     stream early recovery into humanitarian programming, acknowledges that early recovery is an impor-         See also: Cooperation in Natural Disasters
     tant step towards resilience-building and should receive further funding, and encourages the                 A/RES/68/103, op40 (2013)
                                                                                                                  A/RES/67/231, op34 (2012)
     provision of timely, flexible and predictable funding for early recovery, including through estab-
     lished and complementary humanitarian and development instruments;




                                                                                                                111 | REFERENCE GUIDE / 2015
330. Calls upon Member States and the international community to increase and commit adequate, timely,          A/RES/69/135, op17 (2014)
                                                                                                                Strengthening Coordination
     flexible and predictable resources for disaster risk reduction in order to build resilience, includ-       See also: Strengthening Coordination
     ing through complementary humanitarian and development programming and by further strengthening              A/RES/68/102, op15 (2013)
                                                                                                                  A/RES/67/87, op13 (2012)
     national and local capacities to prevent, prepare for and respond to humanitarian emergencies, and           A/RES/66/119, op9 (2011)
     furthermore encourages closer cooperation between national stakeholders and humanitarian and devel-
     opment actors in this regard;
Dispositions addressed to specific actors
331. Decides to expand the scope of the Central Emergency Revolving Fund [CERF] to include the Interna-         A/RES/48/57, op9 (1993)
                                                                                                                Strengthening Coordination
     tional Organization for Migration;
332. Also requests the Secretary-General to explore the feasibility of seeking in-kind donations to meet        A/RES/49/139, op10 (1994)
                                                                                                                Strengthening Coordination
     early emergency requirements;
333. Invites the Secretary-General further to consider innovative means for timely and adequate natural         A/RES/54/233, op18 (1999)
                                                                                                                Cooperation in Natural Disasters
     disaster response, inter alia, through mobilization of additional resources from the private sector;
334. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to strive to broaden the donor base for humanitarian            E/2005/4, op18
                                                                                                                ECOSOC Strengthening Coordination
     response, including by engaging the private sector, as well as to strengthen efforts to further enhance
     transparency and accountability with respect to the channelling and utilization of resources;
335. Calls upon the Secretary-General, on the basis of his report on the improvement of the Central Emergency   A/RES/60/124, op19 (2005)
                                                                                                                Strengthening Coordination
     Revolving Fund and in consultations with all relevant stakeholders, to make the necessary managerial       See also: Strengthening Coordination
     and administrative arrangements to facilitate the implementation of the grant element and set up             A/RES/51/194, op12 (1996)

     appropriate reporting and accountability mechanisms to ensure that the funds allocated through
     the Fund [CERF] are used in the most efficient, effective and transparent manner possible;

                                                                                                                112 | REFERENCE GUIDE / 2015
13.    Consolidated Appeals Process (CAP) and Needs Assessment
REFERENCE                                                                                                         LEGISLATIVE DECISION

Overarching principles, policies and guidelines
336. Notes with appreciation the increased attention paid to the issue of internally displaced persons in         A/RES/68/180, op25 (2013)
                                                                                                                  Protection of and Assistance to IDPs
     the consolidated inter-agency appeals process, and encourages further efforts to improve the integration     See also: Protection of and Assistance to IDPs
     of the protection and assistance needs of internally displaced persons in consolidated appeals;                A/RES/66/165, op21 (2011)
                                                                                                                    A/RES/64/162, op19 (2009)
                                                                                                                    A/RES/62/153, op19 (2007)
                                                                                                                    A/RES/60/168, op16 (2005)
                                                                                                                    A/RES/58/177, op15 (2003)
                                                                                                                    A/RES/56/164, op11 (2001)

337. Also encourages efforts to provide safe and enabling learning environments and quality education in          E/2014/13, op11 (2014)
                                                                                                                  ECOSOC Strengthening Coordination
     emergencies, in particular for the well-being of all girls and boys, to contribute to a smooth transition    See also: Strengthening Coordination
     from relief to development;                                                                                    A/63/139, op12 (2008)
                                                                                                                  ECOSOC Strengthening Coordination
                                                                                                                    E/2011/8, op8
                                                                                                                    E/2009/3, op7
                                                                                                                    E/2010/1, op7

Dispositions addressed to Member States
338. Calls upon potential donors to adopt the necessary measures to increase and expedite their contri-           A/RES/47/168, op4 (1992)
                                                                                                                  Strengthening Coordination
     butions, including setting aside, on a stand-by basis, financial and other resources that can be disbursed
     quickly to the United Nations system in response to the consolidated appeals of the Secretary-General;




                                                                                                                  113 | REFERENCE GUIDE / 2015
339. Calls upon States to respond quickly and generously to consolidated appeals for humanitarian                 A/RES/51/194, op10 (1996)
                                                                                                                  Strengthening Coordination
     assistance, taking into account the importance for donors to be flexible in their response to the specific   See also: Strengthening Coordination
     requirements of affected populations, for rapid-response as well as for early rehabilitation and recovery;     A/RES/48/57, op16 (1993)
                                                                                                                    A/RES/49/139, op13 (1994)
                                                                                                                  ECOSOC Strengthening Coordination
                                                                                                                    E/1999/1, op5

340. Welcomes the initiative of donors to meet and consider the global trend in humanitarian response to          E/2002/32, op19
                                                                                                                  ECOSOC Strengthening Coordination
     ensure that imbalances can be addressed when consolidated appeals are launched;
341. Underlines the urgent need to allocate adequate and predictable resources to the safety and secu-            A/RES/65/132, op33 (2010)
                                                                                                                  Safety and Security
     rity of United Nations personnel, through regular and extrabudgetary resources, including through the con-   See also: Safety and Security
     solidated appeals process, and encourages all States to contribute to the Trust Fund for Security of Staff     A/RES/64/77, op30 (2009)
                                                                                                                    A/RES/63/138, op31 (2008)
     Members of the United Nations System, inter alia, with a view to reinforcing the efforts of the Department     A/RES/62/95, op27 (2007)
     of Safety and Security to meet its mandate and responsibilities to enable the safe delivery of programmes;
342. Requests Member States, relevant humanitarian organizations of the United Nations system and other           A/RES/69/135, op32 (2014)
                                                                                                                  Strengthening Coordination
     relevant humanitarian actors to ensure that all aspects of humanitarian response, including disaster         See also: Strengthening Coordination
     preparedness and needs assessments, take into account the specific humanitarian needs and vulner-              A/RES/68/102, op28 (2013)
                                                                                                                    A/RES/67/87, op26 (2012)
     abilities of all components of the affected population, in particular girls, boys, women, older persons        A/RES/66/119, op20 (2011)
                                                                                                                    A/RES/65/133, op17 (2010)
     and persons with disabilities, including in the design and implementation of disaster risk reduction,          A/RES/64/76, op16 (2009)
     humanitarian and recovery programming and post- humanitarian emergency reconstruction, and in this
     regard encourages efforts to ensure gender mainstreaming, including in the analysis of allocations and
     programme implementation, and through greater use of the gender marker, and emphasizes the impor-
     tance of full participation of, in particular, women and persons with disabilities in decision-making pro-
     cesses related to humanitarian response;


                                                                                                                  114 | REFERENCE GUIDE / 2015
343. Encourages Member States and the United Nations system to support national initiatives that address         A/RES/69/263, op30 (2014)
                                                                                                                 Cooperation in Natural Disasters
     the differentiated impacts of natural disasters on the affected population, including through the           See also: Cooperation in Natural Disasters
     collection and analysis of data disaggregated, inter alia, by sex, age and disability, using, inter           A/RES/68/103, op29 (2013)
                                                                                                                   A/RES/67/231, op26 (2012)
     alia, the existing information provided by States, and through the development of tools, methods and          A/RES/66/277, op24 (2011)
                                                                                                                   A/RES/64/251, op23 (2010)
     procedures that will result in more timely and useful initial needs assessments that lead to targeted and
     more effective assistance, and taking into account the environmental impact;
344. Encourages Member States, the private sector, civil society and other relevant entities to make con-        E/2014/13, op37
                                                                                                                 ECOSOC Strengthening Coordination
     tributions and consider increasing and diversifying their contributions to humanitarian fund-               See also: ECOSOC Strengthening Coordination
     ing mechanisms, including consolidated and flash appeals, the Central Emergency Response Fund and             E/2013/6, op33
                                                                                                                   E/2012/3, op33
     other funds, based on and in proportion to assessed needs, as a means of ensuring flexible, predict-          E/2011/8, op29
                                                                                                                   E/2010/1, op23
     able, timely, needs-based and, where possible, multi-year, non-earmarked and additional                       E/2009/3, op21
     resources to meet global humanitarian challenges, encourages donors to adhere to the principles of            E/2008/36, op16

     good humanitarian donorship, and reiterates that contributions for humanitarian assistance should
     be provided in a way which is not to the detriment of resources made available for international coopera-
     tion for development;
Dispositions addressed to the United Nations and/or the humanitarian system in general
345. For emergencies requiring a coordinated response, the Secretary-General should ensure that an initial       A/RES/46/182, op31 (1991)
                                                                                                                 Strengthening Coordination
     consolidated appeal covering all concerned organizations of the system, prepared in consultation
     with the affected state, is issued within the shortest possible time and in any event not longer than
     one week. In the case of prolonged emergencies, this initial appeal should be updated and elaborated
     within four weeks, as more information becomes possible;



                                                                                                                 115 | REFERENCE GUIDE / 2015
346. Consolidated appeals should be put together at the field level with the active participation of the       E/2013/6, op2
                                                                                                               ECOSOC Strengthening Coordination
     host Government, the Resident Coordinator and field representatives of the organizations of the system,   See also: ECOSOC Strengthening Coordination
     donors and non-governmental organizations. Consolidated appeals, with appropriate plans of operation,       E/1993/1, op26
                                                                                                                 E/1998/1, op18
     should be a key component of a comprehensive strategy that meets immediate humanitarian                     E/1993/1, op25
     needs, is compatible with longer-term rehabilitation and development requirements and addresses
     root causes. Special attention should be paid to the needs of vulnerable groups, including children
     and women. Information on the follow-up of the consolidated appeals, including the contribution and
     disbursement of donors and the implementation of projects contained therein, should be provided regu-
     larly to Governments;
347. Calls upon United Nations organizations to continue to improve needs assessment methodologies in          E/2002/32, op17
                                                                                                               ECOSOC Strengthening Coordination
     the consolidated appeals process and to strengthen efforts to report on results;                          See also: ECOSOC Strengthening Coordination
                                                                                                                 E/2004/50, op40

348. Requests relevant United Nations organizations, in consultation with Member States, to coordinate and     E/2007/3, op15
                                                                                                               ECOSOC Strengthening Coordination
     strengthen needs assessments and improve data on beneficiaries by agreeing on common defi-
     nitions, indicators, information management mechanisms and consistent methodologies for
     data collection;
349. Calls upon relevant United Nations organizations to support the improvements of the consolidated          A/RES/63/139, op13 (2008)
                                                                                                               Strengthening Coordination
     appeals process, inter alia, by engaging in the preparation of needs analysis and common humani-          See also: Strengthening Coordination
     tarian action plans, in order to further the development of the process as an instrument for United         A/RES/60/124, op12 (2005)
                                                                                                               ECOSOC Strengthening Coordination
     Nations strategic planning and prioritization, and by involving other relevant humanitarian organi-         E/1998/1, op18
     zations in the process, while reiterating that consolidated appeals are prepared in consultation with
     affected States;


                                                                                                               116 | REFERENCE GUIDE / 2015
350. Calls upon relevant United Nations organizations to support the improvement of the consolidated appeals      A/RES/68/102, op27 (2013)
                                                                                                                  Strengthening Coordination
     process, inter alia, by engaging in the preparation of needs analyses and common humanitarian                See also: Strengthening Coordination
     action plans, including through a better analysis of gender-related allocations, in order to further           A/RES/67/87, op35 (2012)
                                                                                                                    A/RES/66/119, op19 (2011)
     the development of the process as an instrument for United Nations strategic planning and prioritization,      A/RES/65/133, op16 (2010)
     and by involving other relevant humanitarian organizations in the process, while reiterating that consoli-
     dated appeals should be prepared in consultation with affected States;
351. Calls upon United Nations humanitarian organizations, in consultation with Member States, as appropri-       A/RES/69/243, op33 (2014)
                                                                                                                  Strengthening Coordination
     ate, to strengthen the evidence base for humanitarian assistance by further developing common mecha-
                                                                                                                  See also: Strengthening Coordination
     nisms to improve the quality, transparency and reliability of, and make further progress towards, common       A/RES/68/102, op 29 (2013)
                                                                                                                    A/RES/67/87, op 27 (2012)
     humanitarian needs assessments, including through improved collection, analysis and reporting of               A/RES/66/119, op21 (2011)
     sex-, age- and disability-disaggregated data, taking into account environmental impact, to assess              A/RES/64/76, op17 (2009)
                                                                                                                    A/RES/63/139, op14 (2008)
     their performance in assistance and to ensure the most effective use of humanitarian resources by these        A/RES/62/94, op14 (2007)
                                                                                                                    A/RES/61/134, op12 (2006)
     organizations;                                                                                                 A/RES/59/141, op21 (2004)
                                                                                                                  ECOSOC Strengthening Coordination
                                                                                                                    E/2013/6, op18
                                                                                                                    E/2012/3, op18
                                                                                                                    E/2011/8, op16
                                                                                                                    E/2010/1, op24
                                                                                                                    E/2009/3, op23
                                                                                                                    E/2008/36, op17
                                                                                                                    E/2005/4, op13
                                                                                                                  Cooperation in Natural Disasters
                                                                                                                    A/RES/68/103, op30 (2013)
                                                                                                                    A/RES/67/231, op27 (2012)
                                                                                                                    A/RES/66/277, op25 (2011)
                                                                                                                    A/RES/65/133, op18 (2010)
                                                                                                                    A/RES/65/264, op25 (2011)




                                                                                                                  117 | REFERENCE GUIDE / 2015
352. Calls upon relevant United Nations organizations to support the improvement of the Humanitarian             A/RES/69/135, op29 (2014)
                                                                                                                 Strengthening Coordination
     Programme Cycle, in particular the development of Strategic Response Plans and Humanitarian Needs
     Overviews, including consolidated appeals processes, in consultation with the affected States in order to
     strengthen the coordination of humanitarian action, to meet the needs of people affected by humanitar-
     ian emergencies;
Dispositions addressed to specific actors
353. Also requests the Secretary-General to continue to strengthen the consolidated appeals process, making      A/RES/48/57, op15 (1993)
                                                                                                                 Strengthening Coordination
     it more field-oriented, and to ensure that such appeals are based on specific priorities resulting from
     comprehensive and realistic projections of relief requirements for natural disasters and other emergen-
     cies requiring a coordinated response, and in this context invites all concerned operational and
     humanitarian organizations and agencies to cooperate and fully participate in the prepara-
     tion of these appeals;
354. Requests the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, other members of the Inter-Agency         E/2002/32, op13
                                                                                                                 ECOSOC Strengthening Coordination
     Standing Committee, affected countries and other partners concerned to ensure that consolidated             See also: Strengthening Coordination
     appeals contain adequate plans to align relief and transitional programmes, inter alia, in the area           A/RES/51/194, op11 (1996)

     of resource mobilization;
355. Supports the efforts of the Emergency Relief Coordinator to engage in a dialogue with other humanitar-      E/2002/32, op16
                                                                                                                 ECOSOC Strengthening Coordination
     ian actors, including non-governmental organizations, on strengthening their involvement in the devel-
     opment of common humanitarian action plans and consolidated appeals, and encourages them
     to contribute actively to their implementation;




                                                                                                                 118 | REFERENCE GUIDE / 2015
356. Urges the Emergency Relief Coordinator to further develop the global humanitarian financial track-           E/2003/5, op37
                                                                                                                  ECOSOC Strengthening Coordination
     ing system and to refine the comprehensive system for the collection and dissemination of data on
     humanitarian needs and contributions;
357. Encourages Member States, relevant humanitarian organizations and non -governmental organizations            E/2007/3, op18
                                                                                                                  ECOSOC Strengthening Coordination
     to provide timely and accurate information on contributions and the use of humanitarian funds through        See also: ECOSOC Strengthening Coordination
     the financial tracking service, and requests the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs           E/2006/5, op15, op16
                                                                                                                    E/2002/32, op20
     of the United Nations Secretariat to continue to improve the analysis and reporting of comprehensive
     financial information through the financial tracking service;

14.    Humanitarian Field Coordination and Resident/Humanitarian Coordinators
REFERENCE                                                                                                         LEGISLATIVE DECISION

Overarching principles, policies and guidelines
358. Within the overall humanitarian framework described above and in support of the efforts of the affected      A/RES/46/182, op39 (1991)
                                                                                                                  Strengthening Coordination
     countries, the resident coordinator should normally coordinate the humanitarian assistance of the
     United Nations system at the country level. He/she should facilitate the preparedness of the United
     Nations system and assist in a speedy transition from relief to development. He/she should promote
     the use of all locally or regionally available relief capacities. The resident coordinator should chair an
     emergency operations group of field representatives and experts from the system;




                                                                                                                  119 | REFERENCE GUIDE / 2015
Dispositions addressed to Member States
359. Urges Member States, the United Nations and other relevant organizations to take further steps to           A/RES/69/135, op19 (2014)
                                                                                                                 Strengthening Coordination
     provide a coordinated emergency response to the food and nutrition needs of affected popula-                See also: Strengthening Coordination
     tions, while aiming to ensure that such steps are supportive of national strategies and programmes            A/RES/68/102, op17 (2013)
                                                                                                                   A/RES/67/87, op14 (2012)
     aimed at improving food security;                                                                             A/RES/66/119, op10 (2011)
                                                                                                                   A/RES/65/133, op8 (2010)

360. Encourages Member States and the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs to continue to         A/RES/69/135, op4 (2014)
                                                                                                                 Strengthening Coordination
     improve dialogue and collaboration on humanitarian issues, including on policy, in order to foster          See also: Strengthening Coordination
     a more consultative and inclusive approach to humanitarian assistance;                                        A/RES/68/102, op4 (2013)
                                                                                                                   A/RES/67/87, op4 (2012)
                                                                                                                   A/RES/66/119, op4 (2011)

Dispositions addressed to the United Nations and/or the humanitarian system in general
361. The United Nations Resident Coordinator and the Disaster Management Team should continue to be              E/1993/1, op18
                                                                                                                 ECOSOC Strengthening Coordination
     the first line responsible for a coordinated international response to disasters and emergencies. In some
     instances, there may be a need to appoint a special coordinator for humanitarian assistance. What-
     ever the coordination structure, the in-country coordinator should work in close cooperation with the
     Government concerned and local relief organizations and should communicate directly with the Emer-
     gency Relief Coordinator. The organizational and reporting arrangements of the various coordination
     structures including their financing, together with the responsibility and accountability of each part of
     the United Nations system, should be clearly defined at an early stage and communicated to those
     concerned;




                                                                                                                 120 | REFERENCE GUIDE / 2015
362. Encourages all relevant agencies of the United Nations system to collaborate closely at the country          A/RES/51/194, op6 (1996)
                                                                                                                  Strengthening Coordination
     level in carrying out their relief activities, in order to enhance the overall policy coherence, opera-
     tional complementarity and cost-effectiveness of the response of the United Nations system in
     emergencies;
363. Reiterates the need for a more effective, efficient, coherent, coordinated and better performing             A/RES/60/124, op9 (2005)
                                                                                                                  Strengthening Coordination
     United Nations country presence, with a strengthened role for the senior United Nations resident
     official responsible for the coordination of United Nations humanitarian assistance, including appropri-
     ate authority, resources and accountability;
364. Welcomes efforts to strengthen the humanitarian response capacity of and the support to the United           E/2006/5, op18
                                                                                                                  ECOSOC Strengthening Coordination
     Nations resident/humanitarian coordinators and to United Nations country teams, including through the        See also: Strengthening Coordination
     provision of necessary training, the identification of resources and improving the identification and          A/RES/64/76, op5 (2009)
                                                                                                                    A/RES/63/139, op5 (2008)
     selection of United Nations resident/humanitarian coordinators, to help to provide a timely, pre-              A/RES/62/94, op5 (2007)
                                                                                                                    A/RES/61/134, op10 (2006)
     dictable and appropriate response to humanitarian needs and to further improve United Nations                  A/RES/60/124, op10 (2005)
     coordination activities at the field level, and requests the Secretary-General to continue efforts in this   ECOSOC Strengthening Coordination
                                                                                                                    E/2005/4, op12
     regard;
365. Recognizes the importance of involving, as appropriate, relevant entities, including non-governmental        E/2007/3, op7
                                                                                                                  ECOSOC Strengthening Coordination
     organizations and community-based organizations, that provide humanitarian assistance in national            See also: ECOSOC Strengthening Coordination
     and local coordination efforts, and invites those entities to participate in the improvement of humani-        E/2006/5, op10

     tarian assistance, as appropriate;




                                                                                                                  121 | REFERENCE GUIDE / 2015
366. Calls upon the relevant organizations of the United Nations system and, as appropriate, other relevant      A/RES/69/135, op10 (2014)
                                                                                                                 Strengthening Coordination
     humanitarian actors to continue efforts to improve the humanitarian response to natural and man-made
                                                                                                                 See also: Strengthening Coordination
     disasters and complex emergencies by further strengthening humanitarian response capacities at all            A/RES/68/102, op9 (2013)
                                                                                                                   A/RES/67/87, op8 (2012)
     levels, by continuing to strengthen the provision and coordination of humanitarian assistance at              A/RES/66/119, op6 (2011)
     the global and field levels, including through existing cluster coordination mechanisms and in support of     A/RES/65/133, op3 (2010)
                                                                                                                   A/RES/64/76, op3 (2009)
     national authorities of the affected State, as appropriate, and by further enhancing efficiency, trans-       A/RES/63/139, op3 (2008)
                                                                                                                   A/RES/62/94, op4 (2007)
     parency, performance and accountability;                                                                      A/RES/61/134, op3 (2006)
                                                                                                                   A/RES/60/124, op11 (2005)
                                                                                                                 ECOSOC Strengthening Coordination
                                                                                                                   E/2008/36, op6

367. Encourages the United Nations system and other relevant humanitarian and development actors to sup-         A/RES/69/243, op49 (2014)
                                                                                                                 Cooperation in Natural Disasters
     port humanitarian coordinators and resident coordinators, in order to strengthen their capacity,            See also: Cooperation in Natural Disasters
     inter alia, to support the host Government in implementing preparedness measures and to coordinate            A/RES/68/103, op42 (2013)
                                                                                                                   A/RES/67/231, op36 (2012)
     preparedness activities of country teams in support of national efforts, and also encourages the United       A/RES/66/277, op32 (2011)
                                                                                                                   A/RES/64/251, op31 (2010)
     Nations system and other relevant humanitarian actors to further strengthen the ability to quickly and
     flexibly deploy humanitarian professionals to support Governments and country teams in the immediate
     aftermath of a disaster;
368. Encourages United Nations humanitarian organizations and other relevant organizations, while strength-      E/2014/13, op14 (2014)
                                                                                                                 ECOSOC Strengthening Coordination
     ening the coordination of humanitarian assistance in the field, to continue to work in close coordina-      See also: ECOSOC Strengthening Coordination
     tion with national Governments, taking into account the primary role of the affected State in                 E/2013/6, op10
                                                                                                                   E/2012/3, op12
     the initiation, organization, coordination and implementation of such assistance within its territory;        E/2011/8, op11
                                                                                                                   E/2010/1, op9
                                                                                                                   E/2009/3, op9




                                                                                                                 122 | REFERENCE GUIDE / 2015
369. Requests the United Nations system and other relevant actors to continue to improve and strengthen            E/2014/13, op15 (2014)
                                                                                                                   ECOSOC Strengthening Coordination
     humanitarian coordination mechanisms, notably at the field level, including the existing cluster coordi-      See also: ECOSOC Strengthening Coordination
     nation mechanism, and by improving partnership and coordination with national and local authorities,            E/2013/6, op11
                                                                                                                     E/2012/3, op14
     including the use of national/local coordination mechanisms, where possible;                                    E/2011/8, op13



Dispositions addressed to specific actors
370. When necessary, the Department of Humanitarian Affairs [OCHA] should ensure, with the full coopera-           E/1993/1, op19
                                                                                                                   ECOSOC Strengthening Coordination
     tion of operational organizations, the strengthening of the office of the in-country coordinator with addi-
     tional emergency staff. United Nations agencies should provide financial, staff and other resources
     in support of such field co-ordination units. The Council recommended that the General Assembly
     consider the provision of resources that could be drawn on by the Emergency Relief Coordinator for
     establishing special coordination arrangements in the initial stage of an emergency;
371. Also welcomes the establishment of the positions of regional disaster response advisers by the Office         A/RES/57/152, op15 (2002)
                                                                                                                   Cooperation in Natural Disasters
     for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, as well as the initiative of the United Nations Development     See also: Cooperation in Natural Disasters
     Programme to establish regional disaster reduction adviser positions, and encourages the further                A/RES/56/103, op14 (2001)

     development of these initiatives in a coordinated and complementary manner in order to assist develop-
     ing countries in capacity-building for disaster prevention, preparedness, mitigation and response;
372. Encourages the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, in close collaboration with the           A/RES/59/141, op8 (2004)
                                                                                                                   Strengthening Coordination
     United Nations Development Group Office, to improve further the training and capacity of humani-              See also: ECOSOC Strengthening Coordination
     tarian and resident coordinators so that they can respond to the full range of humanitarian issues              E/2004/50, op22

     and those related to transition from relief to development in a given context, including protection and
     assistance needs;

                                                                                                                   123 | REFERENCE GUIDE / 2015
373. Requests the Secretary-General to encourage the relevant organizations of the United Nations system to   E/2005/4, op9
                                                                                                              ECOSOC Strengthening Coordination
     identify and use, as appropriate and available, local resources and expertise from within the
     affected country and/or its neighbours in response to humanitarian needs;
374. Requests the Secretary-General to strengthen the support provided to United Nations resident/            A/RES/69/135, op10 (2014)
                                                                                                              Strengthening Coordination
     humanitarian coordinators and to United Nations country teams, including by providing necessary          See also: Strengthening Coordination
     training, identifying resources and improving the identification of and the selection pro-                 A/RES/65/133, op5 (2010)
                                                                                                                A/RES/64/76, op5 (2009)
     cess for United Nations resident/humanitarian coordinators, and enhancing their perfor-
     mance accountability;
375. Welcomes the continued efforts to strengthen the humanitarian response capacity in order to provide      E/2014/13, op16 (2014)
                                                                                                              ECOSOC Strengthening Coordination
     a timely, predictable, coordinated and accountable response to humanitarian needs, and                   See also: ECOSOC Strengthening Coordination
     requests the Secretary-General to continue efforts in that regard, in consultation with Member States,     E/2013/6, op11
                                                                                                                E/2012/3, op13
     including by strengthening support to United Nations resident/humanitarian coordinators and improving      E/2011/8, op12
                                                                                                                E/2010/1, op10
     their identification, selection and training;
                                                                                                              Strengthening Coordination
                                                                                                                 A/RES/69/135, op5 (2014)
                                                                                                                 A/RES/68/102, op 5 (2013)
                                                                                                                 A/RES/67/87, op5 (2012)
                                                                                                                 A/RES/66/119, op5 (2011)




                                                                                                              124 | REFERENCE GUIDE / 2015
15.    Information Management
REFERENCE                                                                                                        LEGISLATIVE DECISION

Overarching principles, policies and guidelines
376. Stresses the importance of a coordinated process of assessing lessons learned in the interna-               E/2007/3, op14
                                                                                                                 ECOSOC Strengthening Coordination
     tional response to a given humanitarian emergency;
377. Decides to designate 19 August as World Humanitarian Day in order to contribute to increasing pub-          A/RES/63/139, op26 (2008)
                                                                                                                 Strengthening Coordination
     lic awareness about humanitarian assistance activities worldwide and the importance of international
     cooperation in this regard, as well as to honour all humanitarian and United Nations and associated per-
     sonnel who have worked in the promotion of the humanitarian cause and those who have lost their lives
     in the cause of duty, and invites all Member States and the entities of the United Nations system, within
     existing resources, as well as other international organizations and non-governmental organizations, to
     observe it annually in an appropriate manner;
Dispositions addressed to Member States
378. Stresses the need for partnership among Governments of the affected countries, relevant humanitarian        A/RES/56/103, op9 (2001)
                                                                                                                 Cooperation in Natural Disasters
     organizations and specialized companies to promote training in, access to and use of technologies           See also: Cooperation in Natural Disasters
     to strengthen preparedness for and response to natural disasters and to enhance the transfer of current       A/RES/55/163, op13 (2000)

     technologies and corresponding know-how, in particular to developing countries, on concessional and
     preferential terms, as mutually agreed;




                                                                                                                 125 | REFERENCE GUIDE / 2015
379. Also encourages in such operations the sharing of geographical data, including remotely sensed images      A/RES/59/212, op14 (2004)
                                                                                                                Cooperation in Natural Disasters
     and geographic information system and global positioning system data, among Governments, space             See also: Cooperation in Natural Disasters
     agencies and relevant international humanitarian and development organizations, as appropriate, and          A/RES/58/25, op13 (2003)
                                                                                                                  A/RES/57/152, op12 (2002)
     notes in that context initiatives such as those undertaken by the International Charter on Space and         A/RES/56/103, op11 (2001)
                                                                                                                  A/RES/55/163, op15 (2000)
     Major Disasters and the Global Disaster Information Network;
380. Encourages Governments in natural-disaster-prone countries to establish, with the support of the inter-    A/RES/55/163, op18 (2000)
                                                                                                                Cooperation in Natural Disasters
     national community, in particular the donors, national spatial information infrastructures relating to
     natural disaster preparedness, early warning, response and mitigation, including the necessary training
     of personnel;
381. Calls upon States, the United Nations and other relevant actors, as appropriate, to assist in addressing   A/RES/59/212, op11 (2004)
                                                                                                                Cooperation in Natural Disasters
     knowledge gaps in disaster management and risk reduction by identifying ways of improving systems
     and networks for the collection and analysis of information on disasters, vulnerability and risk
     to facilitate informed decision-making;
382. Recognizes that information and telecommunication technology can play an important role in dis-            A/RES/69/263, op26 (2014)
                                                                                                                Cooperation in Natural Disasters
     aster response, encourages Member States to develop emergency response telecommunication capaci-           See also: Cooperation in Natural Disasters
     ties, and encourages the international community to assist the efforts of developing countries in this       A/RES/66/277, op20 (2011)
                                                                                                                  A/RES/65/264, op19 (2010)
     area, where needed, including in the recovery phase;                                                         A/RES/63/141, op15 (2008)
                                                                                                                  A/RES/62/92, op12 (2007)
                                                                                                                  A/RES/61/131, op15 (2006)




                                                                                                                126 | REFERENCE GUIDE / 2015
383. Encourages the further use of space-based and ground-based remote-sensing technologies,                    A/RES/69/263 op27 (2014)
                                                                                                                Cooperation in Natural Disasters
     including as provided by the United Nations Platform for Space-based Information for Disaster Man-         See also: Cooperation in Natural Disasters
     agement and Emergency Response (UN-SPIDER), as well as the sharing of geographical data, for                 A/RES/68/103, op26 (2013)
                                                                                                                  A/RES/67/231, op23 (2012)
     the prevention, mitigation and management of natural disasters, where appropriate, and invites               A/RES/66/277, op21 (2011)
                                                                                                                  A/RES/64/251, op21 (2010)
     Member States to continue to provide their support to the consolidation of the United Nations capability     A/RES/63/141, op17 (2008)
     in the area of satellite-derived geographical information for early warning, preparedness, response          A/RES/62/92, op14 (2007)
                                                                                                                  A/RES/61/131, op17 (2006)
     and early recovery;                                                                                          A/RES/60/125, op16 (2005)

384. Encourages Member States and relevant regional and international organizations to identify and improve     A/RES/69/263, op38 (2014)
                                                                                                                Cooperation in Natural Disasters
     the dissemination of best practices for improving disaster preparedness, response and early recovery       See also: Cooperation in Natural Disasters
     and to scale–up successful local initiatives, as appropriate;                                                A/RES/68/103, op35 (2013)
                                                                                                                  A/RES/67/231, op30 (2012)
                                                                                                                  A/RES/66/277, op27 (2011)

385. Recognizes the opportunities for new technologies, when utilized in a coordinated fashion and              A/RES/69/243, op28 (2014)
                                                                                                                Cooperation in Natural Disasters
     based on humanitarian principles, potentially to improve the effectiveness and accountability of           See also: Cooperation in Natural Disasters
     humanitarian response, and encourages Member States, the United Nations and its humanitarian                 A/RES/68/103, op27 (2013)
                                                                                                                  A/RES/67/231, op24 (2012)
     partners to consider engaging, inter alia, with the volunteer and technical communities in order to make     A/RES/66/277, op22 (2011)
                                                                                                                  A/RES/64/251, op25 (2010)
     use of the variety of data and information available during emergencies and disaster risk efforts;           A/RES/63/141, op19 (2008)
                                                                                                                  A/RES/62/92, op17 (2007)

386. Calls upon Member States, the United Nations and humanitarian organizations to identify better ways        A/RES/69/135, op36 (2014)
                                                                                                                Strengthening Coordination
     of working to address the increasing capacity and resource gap, in order to effectively meet the
     needs of affected populations;




                                                                                                                127 | REFERENCE GUIDE / 2015
Dispositions addressed to the United Nations and/or the humanitarian system in general
387. On the basis of existing mandates and drawing upon monitoring arrangements available within the sys-          A/RES/46/182, op19 (1991)
                                                                                                                   Strengthening Coordination
     tem, the United Nations should intensify efforts, building upon the existing capacities of relevant organi-
     zations and entities of the United Nations, for the systematic pooling, analysis, and dissemination
     of early-warning information on natural disasters and other emergencies. In this context, the
     United Nations should consider making use as appropriate of the early-warning capacities of Govern-
     ments and intergovernmental and nongovernmental organizations;
388. Calls upon the United Nations system to strengthen accountability in the field of humanitarian assis-         A/RES/51/194, op15 (1996)
                                                                                                                   Strengthening Coordination
     tance, in particular through improved monitoring and evaluation, to ensure that:
      (a) Organizations of the United Nations system involved in humanitarian assistance activities develop
      common methodologies for data collection and reporting, situation analyses, needs assess-
      ment, monitoring and tracking of resources, in order to ensure an effective and timely response;
      (b) Clearer arrangements are made for system-wide evaluation, that the lessons learned from evalu-
      ation exercises are systematically applied at the operational level and that joint evaluation criteria are
      developed for humanitarian and disaster relief operations at the planning stage;
389. Also encourages humanitarian agencies to engage in the further strengthening of humanitarian                  E/2002/32, op8
                                                                                                                   ECOSOC Strengthening Coordination
     information centres, by providing timely and accurate information on assessed needs, and the activi-
     ties developed to respond to them;




                                                                                                                   128 | REFERENCE GUIDE / 2015
390. Recognizes the relevance of the global database on internally displaced persons advocated by the          A/RES/64/162, op21 (2009)
                                                                                                               Protection of and Assistance to IDPs
     Representative of the Secretary-General, and encourages the members of the Inter-Agency Standing          See also: Protection of and Assistance to IDPs
     Committee and Governments to continue to collaborate on and support this effort, including by providing     A/RES/62/153, op20 (2007)
                                                                                                                 A/RES/60/168, op17 (2005)
     financial resources and relevant data on situations of internal displacement;                               A/RES/58/177, op16 (2003)
                                                                                                                 A/RES/56/164, op14 (2001)

Dispositions addressed to specific actors
391. Requests the Secretary-General to further develop Reliefweb as the global humanitarian information        A/RES/51/194, op13 (1996)
                                                                                                               Strengthening Coordination
     system for the dissemination of reliable and timely information on emergencies and natural disasters,
     and encourages all Governments, the United Nations agencies, funds and programmes and other rel-
     evant organizations, including non-governmental organizations, to support Reliefweb and actively par-
     ticipate in the Reliefweb information exchange, through the Department of Humanitarian Affairs;
392. Encourages the Secretary-General to develop further the Humanitarian Early Warning System, to             A/RES/51/194, op14 (1996)
                                                                                                               Strengthening Coordination
     make it fully operational as soon as possible and to consult all States on the use to which the data-
     base could be put, as well as its further development, taking into account that early warning informa-
     tion should be made available in an unrestricted and timely manner to all interested Governments and
     authorities concerned;
393. Commends the Emergency Relief Coordinator and his staff for their activities in emergency informa-        A/RES/57/153, op10 (2002)
                                                                                                               Strengthening Coordination
     tion management, and stresses that there is a need for national authorities, relief agencies and other
     relevant actors to continue to improve the sharing of relevant information related to natural dis-
     asters and complex emergencies, including on disaster response and mitigation, and to take full
     advantage of United Nations emergency information services, such as ReliefWeb and the Integrated
     Regional Information Network;

                                                                                                               129 | REFERENCE GUIDE / 2015
16.    Other Mechanisms, including Standby Capacity and Emergency Rules and Procedures
REFERENCE                                                                                                           LEGISLATIVE DECISION

Overarching principles, policies and guidelines
394. Special emergency rules and procedures should be developed by the United Nations to enable all                 A/RES/46/182, op29 (1991)
                                                                                                                    Strengthening Coordination
     organizations to disburse quickly emergency funds, and to procure emergency supplies and equipment,
     as well as to recruit emergency staff;
395. Also welcomes the important contribution of the International Search and Rescue Advisory Group                 A/RES/69/243, op23 (2014)
                                                                                                                    Cooperation In Natural Disasters
     to the effectiveness of international urban search and rescue assistance, and encourages Member                See also: Cooperation In Natural Disasters
     States to continue to support the Advisory Group, in line with General Assembly resolution 57/150 of             A/RES/68/103, op22 (2013)
                                                                                                                      A/RES/67/231, op19 (2012)
     16 December 2002;                                                                                              INSARAG
                                                                                                                       A/RES/57/150, op2 (2002)

396. Takes note of the recommendation of the Secretary-General and decides that the Central Register of             A/RES/65/264, op15 (2011)
                                                                                                                    Strengthening Coordination
     Disaster Management Capacities should be discontinued;
Dispositions addressed to Member States
397. Urges all States, consistent with their applicable measures relating to public safety and national secu-       A/RES/57/150, op3 (2002)
                                                                                                                    INSARAG
     rity, to simplify or reduce, as appropriate, the customs and administrative procedures related to the
     entry, transit, stay and exit of international urban search and rescue teams and their equipment
     and materials, taking into account the Guidelines of the International Search and Rescue Advisory Group,
     particularly concerning visas for the rescuers and the quarantining of their animals, the utilization of air
     space and the import of search and rescue and technical communications equipment, necessary drugs
     and other relevant materials;
                                                                                                                    130 | REFERENCE GUIDE / 2015
398. Also urges all States to undertake measures to ensure the safety and security of international                   A/RES/57/150, op4 (2002)
                                                                                                                      INSARAG
     urban search and rescue teams operating in their territory;
399. Further urges all States that have the capacity to provide international urban search and rescue assis-          A/RES/57/150, op5 (2002)
                                                                                                                      INSARAG
     tance to take the necessary measures to ensure that international urban search and rescue teams under
     their responsibility are deployed and operate in accordance with internationally developed standards as
     specified in the Guidelines of the International Search and Rescue Advisory Group, particularly
     concerning timely deployment, self-sufficiency, training, operating procedures and equipment, and cul-
     tural awareness;
400. Invites Member States to work with relevant United Nations organizations to strengthen humanitarian              E/2007/3, op11
                                                                                                                      ECOSOC Strengthening Coordination
     standby capacities, in particular in the area of disaster relief, including, where appropriate, by participat-   The Central Register was discontinued,
     ing in humanitarian response networks, by contributing to and maintaining the standby directories of the           see A/RES/65/264, op15 (2011)

     Central Register of Disaster Management Capacities and by facilitating standby arrangements
     with the private sector;
401. Encourages Member States, the United Nations system and humanitarian and development organiza-                   A/RES/69/135, op6 (2014)
                                                                                                                      Strengthening Coordination
     tions to continue to assess and improve, together with other relevant stakeholders, including the pri-
                                                                                                                      See also: Strengthening Coordination
     vate sector, how innovation can be more systematically identified and integrated into humanitar-                   A/RES/68/102, op6 (2013)

     ian action in a sustainable manner and to promote the sharing of best practices and lessons                      ECOSOC Strengthening Coordination
                                                                                                                        E/2014/13, op22
     learned on innovative tools, processes and approaches, including those from large-scale natural                    E/2013/6, op16

     disasters, that could improve the effectiveness and quality of humanitarian response, and in this regard
     encourages all relevant stakeholders to continue to support the efforts of Member States, in particular
     developing countries, to strengthen their capacities, including through facilitating access to information
     and communication technologies;

                                                                                                                      131 | REFERENCE GUIDE / 2015
402. Welcomes innovative practices that draw on the knowledge of people affected by humanitarian                  A/RES/69/135, op7 (2014)
                                                                                                                  Strengthening Coordination
     emergencies to develop locally sustainable solutions and to produce life-saving items locally, with mini-
     mal logistical and infrastructure implications;
403. Encourages innovative practices which draw on the knowledge of people affected by natural dis-               A/RES/69/243, op16 (2014)
                                                                                                                  Cooperation in Natural Disasters
     asters to develop locally sustainable solutions and to produce life-saving items locally, with minimal
     logistical and infrastructure implications;
404. Recalling General Assembly resolution 68/1 of 20 September 2013, in which the Assembly stated that the       E/2014/13, pp16
                                                                                                                  ECOSOC Strengthening Coordination
     Council and the Assembly, especially its Second and Third Committees, need to consider and take steps
     towards the rationalization of their agendas, with a view to eliminating duplication and overlap and
     promoting complementarity in the consideration and negotiation of similar or related issues;
Dispositions addressed to the United Nations and/or the humanitarian system in general
405. The United Nations should build upon the existing capacities of relevant organizations, establish a cen-     A/RES/46/182, op27 (1991)
                                                                                                                  Strengthening Coordination
     tral register of all specialized personnel and teams of technical specialists, as well as relief supplies,   The Central Register was discontinued, see
     equipment and services available within the United Nations system and from Governments and inter-              A/RES/65/264, op15 (2011)

     governmental and non-governmental organizations, that can be called upon at short notice by the United
     Nations;
406. The United Nations should continue to make appropriate arrangements with interested Governments and          A/RES/46/182, op28 (1991)
                                                                                                                  Strengthening Coordination
     intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations to enable it to have more expeditious access,
     when necessary, to their emergency relief capacities, including food reserves, emergency stockpiles and
     personnel, as well as logistic support;



                                                                                                                  132 | REFERENCE GUIDE / 2015
407. Welcomes, so as to increase further the effectiveness of humanitarian assistance, the incorporation             A/RES/69/243, op23 (2014)
                                                                                                                     Cooperation in Natural Disasters
     of experts from developing countries that are prone to natural disasters into the United Nations                See also: Cooperation in Natural Disasters
     Disaster Assessment and Coordination system, and the work of the International Search and                         A/RES/68/103, op21 (2013)
                                                                                                                       A/RES/67/231, op19 (2012)
     Rescue Advisory Group in assisting such countries in strengthening urban search and rescue capaci-                A/RES/66/277, op18 (2011)
                                                                                                                       A/RES/65/264, op17 (2010)
     ties and establishing mechanisms for improving their coordination of national and international response          A/RES/64/251, op17 (2009)
     in the field;
408. Welcomes the important contribution of the United Nations Disaster Assessment and Coordina-                     A/RES/69/243, op22 (2014)
                                                                                                                     Cooperation in Natural Disasters
     tion system to the effectiveness of humanitarian assistance in supporting Member States, upon their             See also: Cooperation in Natural Disasters
     request, and the United Nations system in preparedness and humanitarian response, and encourages                  A/RES/68/103, op21 (2013)
                                                                                                                       A/RES/67/231, op19 (2012)
     the continued incorporation into this mechanism of experts from developing countries that are prone to            A/RES/66/277, op18 (2011)
     natural disasters;
409. Requests the United Nations to continue to identify solutions to strengthen its ability to recruit and          A/RES/69/135, op12 (2014)
                                                                                                                     Strengthening Coordination
     deploy appropriately senior, skilled and experienced humanitarian staff quickly and flexibly,                   See also: ECOSOC Strengthening Coordination
     giving paramount consideration to the highest standards of efficiency, competence and integrity,                  E/2014/13, op 17 and op18
                                                                                                                       E/2013/6, op13
     while paying due regard to gender equality and to recruiting on as wide a geographical basis as                   E/2012/3, op21
                                                                                                                       E/2011/8, op17
     possible to further develop specialist technical expertise and capacity to fill gaps in critical humanitarian     E/2010/1, op11
     programming and to procure emergency relief material rapidly and cost-effectively, and locally when
     appropriate, in order to support Governments and United Nations country teams in the coordination and
     provision of international humanitarian assistance;




                                                                                                                     133 | REFERENCE GUIDE / 2015
410. Requests the United Nations to continue to identify solutions to strengthen its ability to recruit and       A/RES/69/135, op12 (2014)
                                                                                                                  Strengthening Coordination
     deploy appropriately senior, skilled and experienced humanitarian staff quickly and flexibly,                See also: Strengthening Coordination
     giving paramount consideration to the highest standards of efficiency, competence and integrity, while         A/RES/68/102, op11 (2013)
                                                                                                                    A/RES/67/87, op10 (2012)
     paying due regard to gender equality and to recruiting on as wide a geographical basis as possible, and      ECOSOC Strengthening Coordination
     in this regard encourages the United Nations Development Group to strengthen the resident coordinator          E/2014/13, op 17 & op18

     system, on which the humanitarian coordinator system is based, in order to ensure full implementation of
     the management and accountability system of the United Nations development and resident coordinator
     system;
411. Takes note of the recommendation of the Secretary-General, and decides that the Central Register of          A/RES/64/264, op15 (2011)
                                                                                                                  Cooperation in Natural Disasters
     Disaster Management Capacities should be discontinued;

412. Also requests the United Nations to continue to develop specialist technical expertise and capac-            E/2014/13, op18 (2014)
                                                                                                                  ECOSOC Strengthening Coordination
     ity to fill gaps in critical humanitarian programming and to procure emergency relief material rap-          See also: ECOSOC Strengthening Coordination
     idly and cost-effectively, and locally when appropriate, in order to support Governments and                   E/2013/6, op14
                                                                                                                    E/2012/3, op22
     United Nations country teams in the coordination and provision of international humanitarian assistance;
Dispositions addressed to specific actors
413. Recognizes efforts by the Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency Relief Coor-        A/RES/55/163, op7 (2000)
                                                                                                                  Cooperation in Natural Disasters
     dinator, the members of the Inter-Agency Standing Committee and other members of the United Nations          See also: ECOSOC Strengthening Coordination
     system in promoting preparedness for response at the national, regional and international levels and           E/2002/32, op4
                                                                                                                  Cooperation in Natural Disasters
     in strengthening the mobilization and coordination of humanitarian assistance of the United Nations            A/RES/54/233, op5 (1999)
     system in the field of natural disasters, and in this context welcomes the expansion of the United Nations
     disaster assessment and coordination teams to include experts from all areas of the world;


                                                                                                                  134 | REFERENCE GUIDE / 2015
414. Requests the Secretary-General, in collaboration with relevant organizations and partners, to continue       A/RES/57/152, op19 (2002)
                                                                                                                  Cooperation in Natural Disasters
     progress on compiling a directory of disaster mitigation capacity at the national, regional and inter-
                                                                                                                  See also: Cooperation in Natural Disasters
     national levels as well as the Directory of Advanced Technologies for Disaster Response as a new part          A/RES/56/103, op20 (2001)

     of the Central Register of Disaster Management Capacities;
415. Requests the Secretary-General, in consultation with States and relevant organizations, to further develop   A/RES/60/124, op13 (2005)
                                                                                                                  Strengthening Coordination
     and improve, as required, mechanisms for the use of emergency stand-by capacities, including,
                                                                                                                  See also: ECOSOC Strengthening Coordination
     where appropriate, regional humanitarian capacities, under the auspices of the United Nations, inter           E/2005/4, op10

     alia, through formal agreements with appropriate regional organizations, and to report on that issue to
     the General Assembly at its sixty-first session through the Economic and Social Council;
416. Requests the Secretary-General, in consultation with States and relevant organizations, to continue to       A/RES/61/131, op11 (2006)
                                                                                                                  Cooperation in Natural Disasters
     explore ways to strengthen the rapid response capacities of the international community to pro-              See also: Cooperation in Natural Disasters
     vide immediate humanitarian relief, building on existing arrangements and ongoing initiatives;                 A/RES/60/125, op11 (2005)


417. Requests the Secretary-General to encourage the relevant organizations of the United Nations system to       E/2007/3, op16
                                                                                                                  ECOSOC Strengthening Coordination
     continue to identify and use, as appropriate and available, local resources and expertise from
     within the affected country and/or its neighbours in response to humanitarian needs;




                                                                                                                  135 | REFERENCE GUIDE / 2015
                                For more information, please contact the
                            Policy Development and Studies Branch (PDSB)
                      Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA)
                                       E-mail: ochapolicy@un.org


                        This report is also available on the following websites:
                                  OCHA (http://ochaonline.un.org)
                                   ReliefWeb (www.reliefweb.int)




© United Nations 2015
This publication enjoys copyright under Protocol 2 of the
Universal Copyright Convention. No portion of this publication may be reproduced
for sale or mass publication without the express and written consent from the
Policy Development and Studies Branch, Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs.
           Policy Development
           and Studies Branch
15-03535
