             United Nations                                                                             ST/SGB/2010/5*
             Secretaria
                                                                                     23 April 2010




             Secretary-General’s bulletin
             Establishment and operation of the Central Emergency
             Response Fund
                  The Secretary-General, pursuant to section 3.2 of Secretary-General’s bulletin
             ST/SGB/2009/4, for the purposes of establishing a regime for the administration and
             management of the loan and grant components of the Central Emergency Response
             Fund, established in accordance with General Assembly resolutions 46/182 and
             60/124, promulgates the following:

             Section 1
             Introduction and general provisions
             Background
             1.1 The Central Emergency Revolving Fund was established by the Secretary-
             General under his authority in accordance with General Assembly resolution 46/182.
             The Fund is used to make loans to eligible organizations, as defined in section 2.1
             below, to ensure the rapid and coordinated response of those organizations to
             requests for emergency assistance. The loans are reimbursed to the loan element of
             the Fund as a first charge against the voluntary contributions received in respect of
             the programme or project to which the loan relates.
             1.2 Pursuant to the report of the Secretary-General on the improvement of the
             Central Emergency Revolving Fund (A/60/432), the General Assembly, in its
             resolution 60/124, decided to add a grant element to make resources immediately
             available to support rapid response to humanitarian crises and to address critical
             humanitarian needs in underfunded emergencies. As an element of the Secretary-
             General’s humanitarian reform package, the Fund should reinforce the realization of
             the other elements of the reform related to the strengthening of humanitarian
             leadership, partnership, coordination and response.
             1.3 The loan and grant elements are implemented by the establishment of a general
             trust fund called the Central Emergency Response Fund. 1 Together, the loan and
             grant elements shall have an overall annual target of $500 million funded from
             voluntary contributions. The Fund’s loan element shall continue to have a targe
        __________________
           * Reissued for technical reasons on 10 May 2010.
           1 The loan and grant elements of the Fund are administered separately. The title adopted by the

             General Assembly, namely the Central Emergency Response Fund, refers to both elements.


10-32744* (E) 120510
*1032744*
ST/SGB/2010/5


                level of $50 million; the Fund’s grant element shall have an annual target of
                $450 million to provide grants to eligible organizations, as defined in section 2.1
                below.

                Administration and management of the Central Emergency Response Fund
                1.4 The administration of the loan and grant elements of the Fund shall be
                governed by the Financial Regulations and Rules of the United Nations.
                1.5 The Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency Relief
                Coordinator (hereinafter referred to as “the Coordinator”) shall have overall
                responsibility for funding decisions and programmatic management of the Fund, and
                ensure that funding decisions from the loan and grant elements are made in
                accordance with the present bulletin.
                1.6 The Coordinator shall be supported by a secretariat and by other units of the
                Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs. The Coordinator shall
                regularly consult with members of the Inter-Agency Standing Committee
                established pursuant to General Assembly resolution 46/182 and with residen
                coordinators or the Resident/Humanitarian Coordinators, as appropriate, on matters
                relating to the utilization of funds in order to obtain guidance and support when
                determining priorities for their use.

                Section 2
                Eligibility
                2.1 The United Nations, its funds, programmes and specialized agencies, as well
                as the International Organization for Migration, shall be eligible to apply for funds.
                The Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs shall not be eligible for
                grants from the grant element of the Fund; however, the Office shall continue to be
                eligible to obtain advances from the loan element.

                Section 3
                Loan element of the Central Emergency Response Fund
                Objectives
                3.1 In accordance with General Assembly resolution 46/182, the $50 million loan
                element of the Fund shall continue to act as a cash-flow mechanism to ensure a
                rapid and coordinated response to humanitarian emergencies. The loan element is
                aimed at strengthening humanitarian coordination efforts by ensuring that adequate
                preparedness measures are put in place to address humanitarian needs. The
                utilization of the loan element shall also be guided by General Assembly resolutions
                48/57 and 56/107.
                3.2 The Coordinator shall be responsible for determining the amount to be
                advanced in each situation and may, at the Coordinator’s discretion, make advances
                up to the total amount of cash available in the loan element of the Fund. Advances
                from the loan element shall continue to be encouraged and, where possible,
                prioritized.




2                                                                                                        10-32744
                                                                                                      ST/SGB/2010/5


           Conditions for the provision and reimbursement of loans
           3.3 Following the application for a loan from an eligible organization, the
           Coordinator shall approve advances from the loan element of the Fund, guided by
           the following terms:
                (a) A formal exchange of letters shall be concluded between the Coordinator
           and each eligible organization. The exchange of letters shall:
                (i) Define the purpose and objectives of the programme or project for which
                the advance is to be made and the means by which they are to be achieved;
                (ii) Specify the conditions that are to           govern      the   financing   and
                implementation of the programme or project;
                (iii) Specify the amount of money to be made available from the Fund
                through a cost plan, the currency in which it will be paid and the purposes for
                which it is to be used;
                (iv) Specify that the advance shall be repaid as a first charge on contributions
                received by the eligible organization in respect of the programme or project, in
                order to replenish the loan element of the Fund;
                (v) Specify that the eligible organization shall furnish copies of written
                pledges in the amount of the loan, unless waived by the Coordinator on a case-
                by-case basis;
                (vi) Specify that the loan shall be repaid within one year;
                (vii) Provide that, should sufficient contributions not be received by the
                eligible organization within a period of one year, the provisions outlined in
                section 3.7 below would apply;
                (b) The exchange of letters shall be transmitted by the Coordinator to the
           Controller to request the disbursement of funds to the eligible organization.
           3.4 In exceptional circumstances involving particularly urgent emergencies, the
           Coordinator may authorize extraordinary advances from the loan element of the
           Fund prior to the determination of the conditions outlined in section 3.3 above. Any
           extraordinary advance must be followed within 30 days by the completion of a
           formal exchange of letters; otherwise, the advance shall become immediately due
           and repayable by the eligible organization.
           3.5 If, in the view of the Coordinator, the response to the emergency situation
           would be adversely affected by the application of the reimbursement provision
           contained in section 3.3 (a) (iv) above, the advance may be extended under the same
           terms and conditions, provided that the Coordinator is satisfied that firm pledges
           have been made in respect of the programme or project in an amount sufficient to
           cover the amount advanced.
           3.6 If, notwithstanding the completion of a formal exchange of letters, the eligible
           organization has not been successful in obtaining pledges sufficient to cover the
           amount advanced, reimbursements to the loan element of the Fund shall, subject to
           section 3.7 below, be delayed until such time as contributions in the necessary
           amount have been received.
           3.7 If an eligible organization has failed to reimburse the loan element of the Fund
           within one year of the date of the advance, the Coordinator shall initiate measures to
           restore the balance of the loan. To that end, the Coordinator may:



10-32744                                                                                                         3
ST/SGB/2010/5


                     (a) Appeal to donors to make specific contributions to the loan element to
                cover the amounts advanced;
                     (b) Require the eligible organization to repay the balance of the advance
                from its own resources;
                      (c) Request authority from the Controller for the utilization of such balances,
                including accumulated interest, of the loan element of the Fund as may exceed the
                target level of $50 million.
                3.8 The Coordinator shall make every effort to obtain full reimbursement to the
                loan element of the Fund in respect of any outstanding advance within two years of
                the date of the advance. None of the measures set out in section 3.7 above shall be
                deemed a write-off of the loan, or portions thereof, as the authority for any write-
                offs is retained by the Controller, in accordance with the Financial Regulations and
                Rules of the United Nations.

                Section 4
                Grant element of the Central Emergency Response Fund
                Objectives
                4.1 The grant element of the Fund shall be used to provide grants to eligible
                organizations so as to ensure a more predictable and timely response to
                humanitarian emergencies, based on demonstrable needs and on priorities identified
                by the Resident Coordinator or Resident/Humanitarian Coordinator in consultation
                with the humanitarian country team, and the affected State, as appropriate.
                Specifically, the objectives of the grant element shall be to:
                      (a)    Promote early action and response to reduce loss of life;
                     (b)     Enhance response to time-critical requirements based on demonstrable
                needs;
                      (c)    Strengthen core elements of humanitarian response in underfunded
                crises.

                Grant components
                4.2 To effectively address its objectives, the grant element shall be used primarily
                to provide immediate funding to ensure a rapid response to humanitarian, life-saving
                needs due to sudden-onset emergencies, time-critical crises or rapid deterioration of
                existing crises. In this regard, a minimum of two thirds of the grant element of the
                Fund shall be utilized to address humanitarian, life-saving needs for rapid response
                purposes. Subject to availability, a maximum of $30 million shall normally be
                applied to any one crisis requiring a rapid response.
                4.3 In order to promote a more equitable response to humanitarian crises across
                the globe, the remaining funds from the grant element (up to one third) shall be
                utilized to provide grants to address core emergency humanitarian needs in
                chronically underfunded emergencies. While Resident Coordinators or Resident/
                Humanitarian Coordinators may request funds for rapid response purposes whenever
                the situation justifies such funding, access to grants for underfunded emergencies is
                limited to those contexts selected for an allocation by the Coordinator.
                4.4 The Coordinator shall initiate appropriate action to identify priority
                underfunded emergencies eligible for grants, based on a review of demonstrable
                core humanitarian needs and consultations with members of the Inter-Agency


4                                                                                                       10-32744
                                                                                                   ST/SGB/2010/5


           Standing Committee, eligible organizations, Resident Coordinators or Resident/
           Humanitarian Coordinators, humanitarian country teams and the affected State, as
           appropriate. In selecting eligible underfunded emergencies, the Coordinator shall
           consider trends of underfunding for core humanitarian programmes, including flows
           of humanitarian funding provided through bilateral channels and humanitarian aid
           flows not listed in consolidated or flash appeals.
           4.5 Funding allocations for underfunded emergencies shall normally be made by
           the Coordinator twice a year, following the launch of the annual consolidated appeal
           and following the mid-year review of those appeals. This will enable the
           Coordinator to review the status of consolidated appeals, and of humanitarian
           emergencies that may not be subject to consolidated appeals.

           Applying for grant funding
           4.6 Resident Coordinators or Resident/Humanitarian Coordinators, in consultation
           with humanitarian country teams, shall determine priorities for the grant reques
           based on recent needs assessments and on the response priorities as identified in
           consolidated or flash appeals or by the humanitarian country team for those
           countries where an appeal has not been launched, and after taking into accoun
           funding levels and operational capacity for implementation.
           4.7 Eligible organizations shall first explore whether an advance from the loan
           element is a feasible option. Where appropriate, an eligible organization could apply
           for and receive a grant and a loan, in combination, in order to address humanitarian
           needs for a specific programme or project.
           4.8 Resident Coordinators or Resident/Humanitarian Coordinators shall submit to
           the Coordinator a grant request, consisting of proposals with cost breakdowns
           developed by eligible organizations in response to humanitarian needs prioritized
           for funding, with due consideration to the different needs of women, girls, boys and
           men. When preparing a proposal for funding, eligible organizations shall take into
           account the implementation period for Fund grants as stipulated in section 4.14
           below.
           4.9 Requests for grants shall be primarily field-driven and address what in the
           context of that crisis constitutes humanitarian, life-saving needs. In exceptional
           circumstances, in particular those related to transboundary crises affecting multiple
           countries, the Coordinator may consider a request made directly by an eligible
           organization, provided that consultations have taken place with Residen
           Coordinators or Resident/Humanitarian Coordinators in the affected areas.
           4.10 The Coordinator, supported by Resident Coordinators or Resident/
           Humanitarian Coordinators, shall ensure that grants provided to eligible
           organizations will not be intended to replace the existing humanitarian appeal
           mechanisms, which shall remain the primary humanitarian funding tool for
           emergencies, and shall ensure that no duplicate funding occurs for any programme
           or project.

           Conditions for the provision of grants
           4.11 Based on a review of the grant request, the Coordinator shall decide to approve
           humanitarian programmes or projects eligible for funding. Funding from the gran
           element shall be disbursed to the eligible organization according to the following
           terms and conditions:



10-32744                                                                                                      5
ST/SGB/2010/5


                     (a) A formal exchange of letters shall be concluded between the Coordinator
                and each eligible organization. The exchange of letters shall:
                     (i) Define the purpose and objectives of the programme or project for which
                     the grant disbursement shall be made and the means by which they are to be
                     achieved;
                     (ii) Specify the conditions that are to govern the financing and
                     implementation of the programme or project, inter alia, duration of grant,
                     related programme support costs, the financial and narrative reporting required
                     of the eligible organization, and return of unspent funds, including interes
                     earned on the undisbursed balance, where applicable;
                     (iii) Specify the amount of funds to be made available from the Fund and the
                     currency in which they will be paid;
                     (b) The exchange of letters shall be transmitted by the Coordinator to the
                Controller to request the disbursement of funds to the eligible organization for the
                programme or project approved by the Coordinator.
                4.12 The eligible organization shall provide information and periodic reports in
                accordance with section 5.1 below. In accordance with the information provided by
                each eligible organization, the Coordinator shall ensure that no duplicate funding
                occurs for any programme or project.
                4.13 In exceptional circumstances, the Coordinator may commit funds for an
                emergency to address urgent needs before the receipt of a grant request. The
                conditions outlined in section 4.11 above concerning the exchange of letters shall
                precede the disbursement of those funds.

                Implementation period for grants
                4.14 Eligible organizations shall ensure implementation of grants within the time
                period specified in sections 4.15 and 4.16 below. Implementation is defined as the
                completion of programmatic activities related to the grant, and the expensing of
                grant funds within an eligible organization’s internal financial system.
                4.15 Grants for rapid response shall provide an initial injection of funds to enable
                life-saving, humanitarian activities, which shall be implemented within six months
                following the disbursement of funds by the Fund’s secretariat.
                4.16 Grants for underfunded emergencies shall fund core emergency humanitarian
                activities, which shall be implemented by 31 December of the same calendar year
                for grants from the first round of allocations, and by 30 June of the following
                calendar year for grants from the second round of allocations.
                4.17 In the event that a project or programme approved by the Coordinator is
                cancelled, suspended indefinitely before its completion or otherwise no
                implemented within the specified time frame, the eligible organization shall
                immediately contact the Coordinator and arrange a viable solution, which may
                include the return of funds, taking into account all agency legal obligations, or other
                solutions deemed appropriate by the Coordinator, including no-cost extensions.

                Resources for the grant element of the Central Emergency Response Fund
                4.18 For the purpose of replenishing the grant element, the Secretary-General may
                convene an annual pledging conference, in addition to holding other events.



6                                                                                                         10-32744
                                                                                                    ST/SGB/2010/5


           Member States, the private sector, individuals and other entities, as deemed
           appropriate, shall be invited to participate and contribute.

           Section 5
           Accountability and oversigh
           Reporting
           5.1 Eligible organizations shall take full responsibility for the use of and reporting
           on all funds disbursed under the Fund and shall comply with the following
           requirements:
                (a)    Financial reporting
                (i) A preliminary financial report for each grant (or a consolidated report for
                multiple grants issued as one disbursement by the secretariat of the Fund) as a
                31 December, certified by the chief financial officer or a duly authorized
                designated official as accurate and complete to the best of his/her knowledge,
                shall be submitted to the Controller not later than 15 February of the following
                year.
                (ii) A final financial report for each grant (or a consolidated report for
                multiple grants issued as one disbursement by the secretariat of the Fund) as a
                31 December, certified by the chief financial officer, shall be submitted to the
                Controller by 30 June of the following year.
                (iii) Interim mid-year financial reporting requirements specific to funds
                disbursed for rapid response purposes shall be specified in the exchange of
                letters.
                (b)    Narrative reporting
                (i) An annual narrative report produced at the headquarters level, as well as
                additional information on the use and results achieved (as needed) for
                reporting to the General Assembly, shall be submitted to the Coordinator in
                accordance with the deadlines set in the narrative reporting framework.
                (ii) Inputs at the field level on the use of and results achieved with Fund
                resources shall be submitted to Resident Coordinators or Resident/
                Humanitarian Coordinators and the Coordinator, in accordance with the
                deadlines and processes set in the narrative reporting framework.
           5.2 Resident Coordinators or Resident/Humanitarian Coordinators shall oversee
           the monitoring of and narrative reporting on projects funded by the Fund. In this
           regard, Resident Coordinators or Resident/Humanitarian Coordinators shall submit a
           narrative report on the use of such funds and results achieved with funding, based
           on inputs received from eligible organizations at the field level, in accordance with
           the deadlines and processes set in the narrative reporting framework.
           5.3 The Secretary-General shall report with the regularity requested by the
           General Assembly to enable it to provide overall policy guidance and make
           recommendations to strengthen the functioning of the Fund, in accordance with
           Assembly resolutions 46/182 and 60/124.

           Return of funds
           5.4 Unless provided otherwise by its internal financial regulations and rules, the
           eligible organization shall return a portion of the unencumbered balance for each



10-32744                                                                                                       7
ST/SGB/2010/5


                grant with an expired implementation period, along with the interim financial
                statement for the grant. The portion of the unencumbered balance to be returned
                shall be specified in the exchange of letters. All remaining unspent funds for each
                grant shall be returned with the final financial report for that grant.
                5.5 If any eligible organization fails to return unspent funds, fails to use Fund
                resources for the purposes for which they were approved, or fails to meet the
                financial or narrative reporting requirements described above, the Coordinator may
                decide to suspend further funding to that eligible organization.

                Audits
                5.6 Eligible organizations that have received a loan or a grant shall comply with
                their own financial regulations and rules, including their own internal and external
                auditing procedures and internal arrangements regarding audits of implementing
                partners. If an audit report contains observations specific to the contribution of the
                Fund, the eligible organization shall communicate the recommendations and the
                eligible organization’s responses to the Coordinator.

                Evaluations and other measures
                5.7 The Coordinator shall commission independent, retrospective and substantive
                evaluations of the functioning and utilization of the Fund, as needed. The
                Coordinator also may decide to undertake other reviews and/or assessments or pu
                in place other performance and accountability measures, as he/she deems
                appropriate on the basis of the performance and accountability framework for the
                Fund.
                5.8 Eligible organizations shall participate in any evaluation or review of the
                Fund, and shall comply with measures included in the Fund’s performance and
                accountability framework.
                5.9 The dedicated Fund website shall continue to contribute to improved
                accountability and transparency by providing, inter alia, information on the
                utilization of the Fund and donor contributions.

                Section 6
                Advisory Group
                6.1 The Secretary-General shall appoint an Advisory Group comprising up to 18
                independent experts who broadly represent the humanitarian community. The
                Advisory Group, through the Coordinator, shall provide the Secretary-General with
                broad policy advice on the implementation of the Fund’s mandate as a whole,
                including on the speed and appropriateness of its allocations. The Advisory Group
                shall examine the Fund’s performance and reporting mechanisms in order to ensure
                accountability and transparency.

                Section 7
                Final provisions
                7.1   The present bulletin shall enter into force on the date of its issuance.
                7.2   Secretary-General’s bulletin ST/SGB/2006/10 is hereby abolished.

                                                                                (Signed) BAN Ki-moon
                                                                                     Secretary-General


8                                                                                                        10-32744
