             United Nations                                                                             ST/SGB/2006/10
             Secretaria
                                                                                     10 October 2006




             Secretary-General’s bulletin
             Establishment and operation of the Central Emergency
             Response Fund

                  The Secretary-General, pursuant to section 3.2 of Secretary-General’s bulletin
             ST/SGB/1997/1, for purposes of establishing a regime for the administration and
             management of the loan and grant components of the Central Emergency Response
             Fund, established in accordance with General Assembly resolutions 46/182 of
             19 December 1991 and 60/124 of 15 December 2005, promulgates the following:

             Section 1
             Introduction and general provisions

             Background
             1.1 The Central Emergency Revolving Fund was established by the Secretary-
             General under his authority in accordance with General Assembly resolution 46/182.
             The Fund is used to make loans to Eligible Organizations, as defined in section 2.1
             below, to ensure the rapid and coordinated response of those organizations to
             requests for emergency assistance. The loans are reimbursed to the loan element of
             the Fund as a first charge against the voluntary contributions received in respect of
             the programme or project to which the loan relates.
             1.2 Pursuant to the report of the Secretary-General on the improvement of the
             Central Emergency Revolving Fund (A/60/432), the General Assembly, in its
             resolution 60/124, decided to add a grant element to make resources immediately
             available to support rapid response to humanitarian crises and address critical
             humanitarian needs in underfunded emergencies. The loan and grant elements are
             implemented by the establishment of a general trust fund called the Central
             Emergency Response Fund. 1
             1.3 Together the loan and grant elements shall have an overall target of
             $500 million funded from voluntary contributions. The Fund’s loan element shall
             continue to have a target level of $50 million; the Fund’s grant element shall have
             an overall target of $450 million to provide grants to Eligible Organizations, as
             defined in section 2.1.
        __________________
            1 The loan and grant elements of the Fund are administered separately. The new title adopted by

             the General Assembly, namely the Central Emergency Response Fund, refers to both elements.


06-56535 (E) 171006
*0656535*
ST/SGB/2006/10


                 Administration and management of the Central Emergency Response Fund
                 1.4 The administration of the loan and grant elements of the Fund shall be
                 governed by the Financial Regulations and Rules of the United Nations.
                 1.5 The programme manager of the Fund shall be the Under-Secretary-General for
                 Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency Relief Coordinator. The Coordinator shall
                 ensure that advances from the loan and grant elements are made in accordance with
                 the present bulletin.
                 1.6 The Coordinator shall be supported by a small secretariat as well as by other
                 branches of the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs. The
                 Coordinator shall regularly consult with the Inter-Agency Standing Committee
                 established pursuant to General Assembly resolution 46/182 and the
                 resident/humanitarian coordinators, as appropriate, on matters relating to the
                 utilization of the funds in order to obtain guidance and support when determining
                 priorities for their use.

                 Section 2
                 Eligibility
                 2.1 The United Nations, its funds, programmes and specialized agencies, as well
                 as the International Organization for Migration, shall be eligible to apply for funds.
                 The Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs shall not be eligible for
                 grants from the grant element of the Fund; however, the Office shall be eligible to
                 obtain advances from the loan element.
                 2.2 An Eligible Organization that has been approved for a loan or grant from the
                 Fund will hereinafter be referred to as an Operational Organization.

                 Section 3
                 Loan element of the Central Emergency Response Fund

                 Objectives
                 3.1 In accordance with General Assembly resolution 46/182, the $50 million loan
                 element of the Fund shall continue to act as a cash flow mechanism to ensure rapid
                 and coordinated response to humanitarian emergencies. The loan element is aimed
                 at strengthening humanitarian coordination efforts by ensuring that adequate
                 preparedness measures are put in place to address humanitarian needs. The
                 utilization of the Fund shall also be guided by General Assembly resolutions 48/57
                 of 14 December 1993 and 56/107 of 14 December 2001.
                 3.2 Advances from the loan element shall continue to be encouraged and, where
                 possible, prioritized. Before providing Eligible Organizations with grants, the
                 Coordinator shall first explore whether an advance from the loan element is a
                 feasible option.
                 3.3 The Coordinator shall be responsible for determining the amount to be
                 advanced in each situation and may, at the Coordinator’s discretion, make advances
                 up to the total amount of cash available in the loan element of the Fund.




2                                                                                                         06-56535
                                                                                                   ST/SGB/2006/10


           Conditions for the provision of loans from the Central Emergency
           Response Fund
           3.4 The Coordinator shall approve advances from the loan element of the Fund
           guided by the following terms:
                (a) A formal exchange of letters shall be concluded between the Coordinator
           and each Operational Organization. The exchange of letters shall:
                (i) Define the purpose and objectives of the programme or project for which
                the advance is to be made and the means by which they are to be achieved;
                (ii) Specify the conditions which are to govern the financing and
                implementation of the programme or project;
                (iii) Specify the amount of money to be made available from the Fund, the
                currency in which it will be paid and the purposes for which it is to be used;
                (iv) Specify that the advance shall be repaid as a first charge on contributions
                received by the Operational Organization in respect of the programme or
                project, in order to replenish the loan element of the Fund;
                (v)   Indicate a target date by which the advance is expected to be repaid;
                (vi) Provide that, should sufficient contributions not be received by the
                Operational Organization within a period of one year, the provisions outlined
                in section 3.9 would apply;
                (vii) Specify the financial reporting required to be made by the Operational
                Organization in respect of the programme or project assisted by the advance;
                (b) The exchange of letters shall be transmitted by the Coordinator to the
           Controller to request the disbursement of funds to the Operational Organization.
           3.5 In exceptional circumstances involving particularly urgent emergencies, the
           Coordinator may authorize extraordinary advances from the loan element of the
           Fund prior to the determination of the conditions outlined in section 3.4 above. Any
           extraordinary advance must be followed within 30 days by the completion of a
           formal exchange of letters; otherwise, the advance shall become immediately due
           and repayable by the Operational Organization.

           Reimbursements to the loan element of the Central Emergency Response Fund
           3.6 Reimbursements to the loan element of the Fund by the Operational
           Organization shall be a first charge on contributions received by that Operational
           Organization in respect of the programme or project to which the advance from the
           loan element of the Fund relates.
           3.7 If, in the view of the Coordinator, the response to the emergency situation
           would be adversely affected by the application of the reimbursement provision
           contained in section 3.6 above, the advance may be extended under the same terms
           and conditions, provided that the Coordinator is satisfied that firm pledges have
           been made in respect of the programme or project in an amount sufficient to cover
           the amount advanced.
           3.8 If, notwithstanding the completion of a formal exchange of letters, the
           Operational Organization has not been successful in obtaining pledges sufficient to



06-56535                                                                                                       3
ST/SGB/2006/10


                 cover the amount advanced, reimbursements to the loan element of the Fund shall,
                 subject to section 3.9 below, be delayed until such time as contributions in the
                 necessary amount have been received.
                 3.9 If an Operational Organization has failed to reimburse the loan element of the
                 Fund within one year of the date of the advance, the Coordinator shall initiate
                 measures to restore the balance of the loan. To that end, the Coordinator may:
                      (a) Appeal to donors to make specific contributions to the loan element to
                 cover the amounts advanced;
                      (b) Require the Operational Organization to repay the balance of the advance
                 from its own resources;
                       (c) Request authority from the Controller for the utilization of such balances,
                 including accumulated interest, of the loan element of the Fund as may exceed the
                 target level of $50 million.
                 3.10 The Coordinator shall make every effort to obtain full reimbursement to the
                 loan element of the Fund in respect of any outstanding advance within two years of
                 the date of the advance. The authority for any write-offs is retained by the
                 Controller, in accordance with the Financial Regulations and Rules of the United
                 Nations.

                 Section 4
                 Grant element of the Central Emergency Response Fund

                 Objectives
                 4.1 The grant element of the Fund shall be used to provide grants to Eligible
                 Organizations so as to ensure a more predictable and timely response to
                 humanitarian emergencies, based on demonstrable needs and on priorities identified
                 in consultation with the affected State, as appropriate. 2 Specifically, the objectives
                 of the grant element shall be:
                       (a)    Promoting early action and response to reduce loss of life;
                       (b)    Enhancing response to time-critical requirements;
                       (c)    Strengthening core elements of humanitarian response in underfunded
                 crises.

                 Disbursemen
                 4.2 To effectively address its objectives, the grant element shall be used primarily
                 to provide immediate finance to ensure rapid response to core emergency
                 humanitarian needs due to sudden onset emergencies, which include natural
                 disasters; and urgent requirements due to rapid deterioration within an existing
                 crisis; and to provide support to chronically underfunded emergencies.
                 4.3 In that regard, two thirds of the grant element of the Fund shall be utilized to
                 address core emergency humanitarian needs in sudden onset disasters (or rapid
                 deterioration within existing crises), while up to one third shall be utilized to
         __________________
             2 For purposes of the present bulletin, grants provided from the grant element of the Fund shall be

                 recorded as advances to Operational Organizations.


4                                                                                                                  06-56535
                                                                                                      ST/SGB/2006/10


           provide grants to address core emergency humanitarian needs in chronically
           underfunded emergencies as stipulated in sections 4.8 to 4.10 below. Where
           appropriate, an Eligible Organization could apply for and receive a grant as well as
           a loan, in combination, in order to address such humanitarian needs for a specific
           programme or project.
           4.4 Funds disbursed to Operational Organizations from the grant element to
           support rapid response and to address core emergency humanitarian needs in
           underfunded emergencies shall be provided based on demonstrable needs as
           identified in United Nations appeals and/or by the humanitarian country team.
           Resident/humanitarian coordinators, in consultation with humanitarian country
           teams, shall identify priority lifesaving needs in order to facilitate the Coordinator’s
           selection of country programmes eligible for funding under the grant element.
           4.5 Requests for Fund grants shall primarily be field-driven and address what in
           the context of that crisis constitute core emergency humanitarian needs. In tha
           regard, and following consultations with the humanitarian country team, the
           resident/humanitarian coordinator shall communicate a priority list of lifesaving
           needs to the Coordinator. An Eligible Organization may apply to the Coordinator for
           a grant based on the priority list provided. In exceptional circumstances, the
           Coordinator may consider a request from an Eligible Organization without the
           endorsement of the resident/humanitarian coordinator or in the absence of a priority
           list.
           4.6 The Coordinator, supported by resident/humanitarian coordinators, shall
           ensure that grants provided to Operational Organizations will not be intended to
           constitute a substitute for the existing humanitarian appeal mechanisms, which shall
           remain the primary humanitarian funding tool for emergencies. On the basis of the
           information provided by each Operational Organization under section 5.1 below, the
           Coordinator shall ensure that no duplicate funding occurs for any programme or
           project.

           Disbursements for rapid response
           4.7 The funds disbursed for rapid response purposes shall provide an initial
           injection of funds for a particular emergency. Grants for rapid response shall
           therefore fund activities whose implementation shall take place within three months
           following the disbursement of funds from the Fund. Subject to availability, a
           maximum of $30 million shall normally be applied to any one disaster or
           emergency.

           Disbursements for underfunded emergencies
           4.8 Grants for underfunded emergencies shall be provided in order to promote an
           equitable response to humanitarian crises across the globe and shall be based on
           demonstrable core emergency humanitarian needs. To determine the appropriate use
           of grants for underfunded emergencies, the Coordinator shall consult with the Inter-
           Agency Standing Committee, Eligible Organizations, the resident/humanitarian
           coordinators, humanitarian country teams and the affected State, as appropriate.
           Based on the assessments and consultations carried out, the Coordinator shall
           identify priority areas for support from the grant element.




06-56535                                                                                                          5
ST/SGB/2006/10


                 4.9 In selecting eligible crises, the Coordinator shall consider trends of
                 underfunding for core humanitarian programmes, including flows of humanitarian
                 funding provided through bilateral channels as well as humanitarian aid flows no
                 listed in United Nations appeals. The Coordinator shall initiate appropriate action to
                 select underfunded emergencies eligible for grants.
                 4.10 Disbursements for underfunded emergencies shall be made by the Coordinator
                 twice a year. Funds shall be programmed for disbursements in January, following
                 the launch of the annual consolidated appeal, and in July following the midterm
                 review of those appeals. This will enable the Coordinator to review the status of
                 consolidated appeals, as well as of humanitarian emergencies that may not be
                 subject to consolidated appeals, to determine their level of funding and to identify
                 priority core emergency humanitarian needs based on field-level inputs received
                 from the United Nations and its partners.

                 Conditions for the provision of grants from the Central Emergency
                 Response Fund
                 4.11 The Coordinator shall approve grants from the grant element of the Fund
                 guided by the following terms and conditions:
                      (a) A formal exchange of letters shall be concluded between the Coordinator
                 and each Operational Organization. The exchange of letters shall:
                       (i) Define the purpose and objectives of the programme or project for which
                       the grant disbursement shall be made and the means by which they are to be
                       achieved;
                       (ii) Confirm that the Operational Organization’s emergency reserve funds,
                       where available, are inadequate to meet the humanitarian needs;
                       (iii) Specify the conditions which are to govern the financing and
                       implementation of the programme or project, inter alia, duration of grant,
                       related programme support costs, the financial reporting required to be made
                       by the Operational Organization in respect of the programme or projec
                       assisted by the grant, return of unspent funds, including interest earned on
                       undisbursed balance, where applicable, and a commitment by the requesting
                       agency to reporting and auditing the expenditures made against the gran
                       provided;
                       (iv) Specify the amount of funds to be made available from the Fund and the
                       currency in which they will be paid;
                      (b) The exchange of letters shall be transmitted by the Coordinator to the
                 Controller to request the disbursement of funds to the Operational Organization. 3
                 4.12 The Operational Organization shall provide information and periodic reports in
                 accordance with section 5.1 below. In accordance with the information provided by
                 each Operational Organization, the Coordinator shall ensure that no duplicate
                 funding takes place for any programme or project.

         __________________
             3 The advances thus disbursed shall be cleared and the relevant amount reflected as “other”

                 expenditure in the United Nations General Trust Fund financial statement once the expenditure
                 reports from the Operational Organization have been accepted by the Coordinator.


6                                                                                                                06-56535
                                                                                                     ST/SGB/2006/10


           4.13 In exceptional circumstances, the Coordinator may authorize extraordinary
           grants prior to the determination of the conditions outlined in section 4.11 above.
           Any extraordinary grant must be followed within 30 days by the completion of a
           formal exchange of letters. If such an exchange of letters is not concluded within
           that period, the Coordinator shall ensure that the grant be repaid to the Fund no
           later than 30 days following a corresponding request from the Coordinator to the
           Operational Organization.

           Resources for the grant element of the Central Emergency Response Fund
           4.14 For the purpose of replenishing the grant element, the Secretary-General may
           convene periodic pledging conferences, as necessary. Member States, the private
           sector, individuals and other entities, as deemed appropriate, shall be invited to
           participate and contribute. The Advisory Group established pursuant to section 6
           below shall provide recommendations on the replenishment level taking into
           account the utilization of the grant element. In making recommendations, the
           Advisory Group shall also consider existing humanitarian priorities and forecasted
           needs.

           Section 5
           Accountability, oversight and reporting
           5.1 Operational Organizations that have received a loan or a grant shall comply
           with their own financial regulations and rules, including their own internal and
           external auditing procedures. Such Operational Organizations shall transmit to the
           Coordinator an annual report providing information on and analysis of the activities
           undertaken and the outcomes achieved against the objectives set. The report shall
           also include financial information on expenditures. In the event that the Operational
           Organization has received a grant and the report indicates that the grant has not been
           fully utilized and will not be fully utilized, the Coordinator shall ensure that the
           unutilized amount shall be returned to the grant element of the Fund immediately
           following the completion of the programme or project. In addition, recipients of
           grants shall provide periodic situation reports, which shall be posted on the Fund
           website. Interim certified financial reports as at 31 December, certified by the chief
           financial officer of the grant recipient as accurate and complete to the best of his or
           her knowledge, shall be submitted to the Controller not later than 15 February of
           each year. The final certified reports as at 31 December shall be submitted to the
           Controller by 30 June of each year.
           5.2 The Coordinator shall establish a dedicated website to track the finances and
           expenditures of the Fund. The website shall provide information on the utilization of
           the Fund, distribute public information and include progress and evaluation reports.
           The Coordinator shall ensure appropriate linkages with the Financial Tracking
           System of the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs.
           5.3 In accordance with General Assembly resolutions 46/182 and 60/124, the
           Secretary-General shall provide an annual analytical report to the Assembly to
           enable it to provide overall policy guidance and make recommendations to
           strengthen the functioning of the Fund.
           5.4 At the end of the second year of the operation of the Fund, the Coordinator, in
           consultation with the Inter-Agency Standing Committee, shall commission an



06-56535                                                                                                         7
ST/SGB/2006/10


                 independent, retrospective and substantive evaluation of the functioning and
                 utilization of the Fund.

                 Section 6
                 Advisory Group
                      The Secretary-General shall appoint an Advisory Group comprising 12 experts
                 who broadly represent the humanitarian community. The Advisory Group shall
                 provide the Coordinator with broad policy advice on the implementation of the Fund
                 as a whole, including on the speed and appropriateness of its allocations. The
                 Advisory Group shall examine Fund performance and reports in order to ensure
                 accountability and transparency.

                 Section 7
                 Final provisions
                 7.1   The present bulletin shall enter into force on 1 October 2006.
                 7.2   Secretary-General’s bulletin ST/SGB/251 is hereby abolished.

                                                                              (Signed) Kofi A. Annan
                                                                                    Secretary-General




8                                                                                                       06-56535
