               United Nations                                                                              ST/SGB/2020/5
               Secretaria
                                                                                       1 January 2020




               Secretary-General’s bulletin
               Establishment and operation of the Central Emergency
               Response Fund

                    The Secretary-General, pursuant to section 3.2 of Secretary-General’s bulletin
               ST/SGB/2009/4, for the purposes of establishing a regime for the administration and
               management of the loan and grant components of the Central Emergency Response
               Fund, established in accordance with General Assembly resolutions 46/182, 60/124,
               66/119 and 71/127, promulgates the following:

               Section 1
               Introduction and general provisions
               Background
               1.1 The Central Emergency Revolving Fund was established by the Secretary -
               General under his authority in accordance with General Assembly resolution 46/182.
               The Fund was used to make loans to eligible organizations, as defined in section 2
               below, to ensure the rapid and coordinated response of those organizations to requests
               for emergency assistance. The loans were reimbursed to the Fund as a first charge
               against the voluntary contributions received in respect of the programme or projec
               to which the loan relates.
               1.2 Pursuant to the report of the Secretary-General on the improvement of the
               Central Emergency Revolving Fund (A/60/432), the General Assembly, in its
               resolution 60/124, decided to add a grant element to make resources immediately
               available to support rapid response to humanitarian crises and to address critical
               humanitarian needs in underfunded emergencies. As an element of the Secretary-
               General’s humanitarian reform package, the Fund should reinforce the realization of
               the other elements of the reform related to the strengthening of humanitarian
               leadership, partnership, coordination and response.
               1.3 The loan and grant elements were implemented by the establishment of a general
               trust fund called the Central Emergency Response Fund 1 to replace the Central
               Emergency Revolving Fund. In accordance with General Assembly resolutions
               66/119 and 71/127, the loan element of the Central Emergency Response Fund shall
               have a level of up to $30 million and continue to make loans to eligible organizations,
               as detailed in section 2 below. Pursuant to Assembly resolution 71/127, the Fund’s
       __________________
           1
               The loan and grant elements of the Fund are administered separately. The title adopted by the
               General Assembly, namely the Central Emergency Response Fund, refers to both elements.




21-12609 (E)     220921
*2112609*
ST/SGB/2020/5

                grant element shall have an annual target of $970 million to provide grants to eligible
                organizations, as defined in section 2 below.

                Administration and management of the Central Emergency Response Fund
                1.4 The administration of the loan and grant elements of the Fund shall be governed
                by the Financial Regulations and Rules of the United Nations.
                1.5 The Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency Relief
                Coordinator (hereinafter referred to as “the Coordinator”) shall have overall
                responsibility for funding decisions and programmatic management of the Fund and
                ensure that funding decisions from the loan and grant elements are made in
                accordance with the present bulletin.
                1.6 The Coordinator shall be supported by a secretariat and by other units of the
                Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs. The Coordinator shall regularly
                consult with members of the Inter-Agency Standing Committee established pursuan
                to General Assembly resolution 46/182 and with resident coordinators or the
                resident/humanitarian coordinators, as appropriate, on matters relating to the
                utilization of funds in order to obtain guidance and support when determining
                priorities for their use.

                Section 2
                Eligibility
                      The United Nations, its funds, programmes and specialized agencies, as well as
                the International Organization for Migration, shall be eligible to apply for funds. The
                Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs shall not be eligible for grants
                from the grant element of the Fund; however, the Office shall continue to be eligible
                to obtain advances from the loan element.

                Section 3
                Loan element of the Central Emergency Response Fund
                Objectives
                3.1 In accordance with General Assembly resolutions 46/182 and 66/119, the
                $30 million loan element of the Fund shall continue to act as a cash-flow mechanism
                to ensure a rapid and coordinated response to humanitarian emergencies. Interes
                earned above $30 million shall be credited in the grant element of the Fund and used
                for that purpose. The loan element is aimed at strengthening humanitarian activities
                by ensuring that adequate operational activities are put in place to address
                humanitarian needs. The utilization of the loan element shall also be guided by
                Assembly resolutions 48/57 and 56/107.
                3.2 The Coordinator shall be responsible for determining the amount to be advanced
                in each situation and may, at the Coordinator’s discretion, make advances up to the
                total amount of cash available in the loan element of the Fund. Advances from the
                loan element shall continue to be encouraged and, where possible, prioritized.

                Conditions for the provision and reimbursement of loans
                3.3 Following the application for a loan from an eligible organization, the
                Coordinator shall approve advances from the loan element of the Fund, guided, as
                appropriate, by the following terms:
                     A formal exchange of letters shall be concluded between the Coordinator and
                each eligible organization seeking to make use of the loan facility. A copy of the



2/8                                                                                                       21-12609
                                                                                                      ST/SGB/2020/5

           exchange of letters shall be provided to the Controller together with the request for
           the disbursement of funds to the eligible organization. The exchange of letters shall:
                (i) Define the purpose and objectives of the programme or project for which
                the advance is to be made and the means by which they are to be achieved;
                (ii) Specify the conditions that are to govern the financing and implementation
                of the programme or project;
                (iii) Specify the amount of money to be made available from the Fund through
                a cost plan, the currency in which it will be paid and the purposes for which i
                is to be used;
                (iv) Specify that the advance shall be repaid as a first charge on contributions
                received by the eligible organization in respect of the programme or project, in
                order to replenish the loan element of the Fund, unless waived by the
                Coordinator;
                (v) Specify that the eligible organization shall furnish copies of written
                pledges in the amount of the loan, unless waived by the Coordinator on a case -
                by-case basis;
                (vi) Specify that the loan shall be repaid within one year, unless the
                Coordinator exceptionally agrees otherwise;
                (vii) Provide that, should sufficient contributions not be received by the eligible
                organization within a period of one year, and the Coordinator has granted no
                exception, the provisions outlined in section 3.7 below would apply.
           3.4 In exceptional circumstances involving particularly urgent emergencies, the
           Coordinator may authorize extraordinary advances from the loan element of the Fund
           prior to the determination of the conditions outlined in section 3.3 above. Any
           extraordinary advance must be followed within 30 days by the completion of a formal
           exchange of letters; otherwise, the advance shall become immediately due and
           repayable by the eligible organization.
           3.5 If, in the view of the Coordinator, the response to the emergency situation would
           be adversely affected by the application of the reimbursement provision contained in
           section 3.3 (iv) above, the advance may be extended under the same terms and
           conditions, provided that the Coordinator is satisfied that firm pledges have been
           made in respect of the programme or project in an amount sufficient to cover the
           amount advanced.
           3.6 If, notwithstanding the completion of a formal exchange of letters, the eligible
           organization has not been successful in obtaining pledges sufficient to cover the
           amount advanced, reimbursements to the loan element of the Fund shall, subject to
           section 3.7 below, be delayed until such time as contributions in the necessary amoun
           have been received.
           3.7 If an eligible organization has failed to reimburse the loan element of the Fund
           within one year of the date of the advance, the Coordinator shall initiate measures to
           restore the balance of the loan. To that end, the Coordinator may:
                 (a) Require the eligible organization to repay the balance of the advance from
           its own resources;
                (b) Appeal to donors to make specific contributions to the loan element to
           cover the amounts advanced.
           3.8 The Coordinator shall make every effort to obtain full reimbursement to the loan
           element of the Fund in respect of any outstanding advance within two years of the
           date of the advance. None of the measures set out in section 3.7 above shall be deemed

21-12609                                                                                                        3/8
ST/SGB/2020/5

                a write-off of the loan, or portions thereof, as the authority for any write-offs is
                retained by the Controller, in accordance with the Financial Regulations and Rules of
                the United Nations.

                Section 4
                Grant element of the Central Emergency Response Fund
                Objectives
                4.1 The grant element of the Fund shall be used to provide grants to eligible
                organizations so as to ensure a more predictable and timely response to humanitarian
                emergencies, based on demonstrable needs and on priorities identified by the Residen
                Coordinator or Resident/Humanitarian Coordinator in consultation with the
                humanitarian country team, and the affected State and others, as appropriate.
                Specifically, the objectives of the grant element shall be to:
                     (a)     Promote early action and response to reduce loss of life;
                     (b)     Enhance response to time-critical requirements based on demonstrable
                needs;
                     (c)     Strengthen core elements of humanitarian response in underfunded crises.

                Grant components
                4.2 To effectively address its objectives, the grant element shall be used primarily
                to provide immediate funding to ensure a rapid response to humanitarian, life -saving
                needs due to sudden-onset emergencies, time-critical crises or rapid deterioration of
                existing crises. In this regard, up to two thirds of the grant element of the Fund shall
                normally be utilized to address humanitarian, life-saving needs for rapid response
                purposes.
                4.3 In order to promote a more equitable response to humanitarian crises across the
                globe, the remaining funds from the grant element shall be utilized to provide grants
                to address core emergency humanitarian needs in chronically underfunded
                emergencies. While resident coordinators or resident/humanitarian coordinators may
                request funds for rapid response purposes whenever the situation justifies such
                funding, access to grants for underfunded emergencies is limited to those contexts
                selected for an allocation by the Coordinator.
                4.4 The Coordinator shall initiate appropriate action to identify priority
                underfunded emergencies eligible for grants, based on a review of demonstrable core
                humanitarian needs and consultations with members of the Inter-Agency Standing
                Committee, eligible organizations, resident coordinators or resident/humanitarian
                coordinators, humanitarian country teams and the affected State, as appropriate. In
                selecting eligible underfunded emergencies, the Coordinator shall consider the
                funding status of humanitarian operations.
                4.5 Funding allocations for underfunded emergencies shall normally be made by the
                Coordinator twice a year.

                Applying for grant funding
                4.6 Resident coordinators or resident/humanitarian coordinators, in consultation
                with humanitarian country teams, shall propose priorities for the grant request based
                on recent needs assessments and on the response priorities as identified in
                consolidated or flash appeals or by the humanitarian country team for those countries
                where an appeal has not been launched, and after taking into account funding levels
                and operational capacity for implementation.


4/8                                                                                                        21-12609
                                                                                                     ST/SGB/2020/5

           4.7 Where appropriate, an eligible organization could apply for and receive a gran
           and a loan, in combination, in order to address humanitarian needs for a specific
           programme or project.
           4.8 Resident coordinators or resident/humanitarian coordinators shall submit to t he
           Coordinator a grant request, consisting of proposals with cost breakdowns developed
           by eligible organizations in response to humanitarian needs prioritized for funding,
           with due consideration to the different needs of women, girls, boys and men, and
           noting the particular needs of persons with disabilities. When preparing a proposal
           for funding, eligible organizations shall take into account the implementation period
           for Fund grants as stipulated in section 4.14 below.
           4.9 Requests for grants shall be primarily field-driven and address what in the
           context of that crisis constitutes humanitarian, life-saving needs. In exceptional
           circumstances, for example those related to transboundary crises affecting multiple
           countries, the Coordinator may consider a request made directly by an eligible
           organization, provided that consultations have taken place with resident coordinators
           or resident/humanitarian coordinators in the affected areas.
           4.10 The Coordinator, supported by resident coordinators or resident/humanitarian
           coordinators, shall ensure that grants provided to eligible organizations will not be
           intended to replace the existing humanitarian appeal mechanisms, which shall remain
           the primary humanitarian funding tool for emergencies, and shall ensure that no
           duplicate funding occurs for any programme or project.

           Conditions for the provision of grants
           4.11 Based on a review of the grant request, the Coordinator shall decide to approve
           humanitarian programmes or projects eligible for funding. Funding from the gran
           element shall be disbursed to the eligible organization according to the following
           terms and conditions:
                (a) A formal exchange of letters shall be concluded between the Coordinator
           and each eligible organization. The exchange of letters shall:
                (i) Define the purpose and objectives of the programme or project for which
                the grant disbursement shall be made and the means by which they are to be
                achieved;
                (ii) Specify the conditions that are to govern the financing and implementation
                of the programme or project, inter alia, duration of grant, related programme
                support costs, the financial and narrative reporting required of the eligible
                organization, and return of unspent funds, including interest earned on the
                undisbursed balance, where applicable;
                (iii) Specify the amount of funds to be made available from the Fund and the
                currency in which they will be paid;
                 (b) A copy of the exchange of letters shall be transmitted by the Coordinator
           to the Controller to request the disbursement of funds to the eligible organization for
           the programme or project approved by the Coordinator.
           4.12 The eligible organization shall provide information and periodic reports in
           accordance with section 5.1 below. In accordance with the information provided by
           each eligible organization, the Coordinator shall ensure that no duplicate funding
           occurs for any programme or project.
           4.13 In exceptional circumstances, the Coordinator may commit funds for an
           emergency to address urgent needs before the receipt of a grant request based on
           supporting documentation.

21-12609                                                                                                       5/8
ST/SGB/2020/5

                Implementation period for grants
                4.14 Eligible organizations shall ensure implementation of grants within the time
                period specified in sections 4.15 and 4.16 below. Implementation is d efined as the
                completion of programmatic activities related to the grant, and the expensing of gran
                funds within an eligible organization’s internal financial system.
                4.15 Grants for rapid response shall provide an initial injection of funds to enable
                life-saving, humanitarian activities, which shall normally be implemented within six
                months following the disbursement of funds by the Fund’s secretariat. At the
                discretion of the Coordinator, the grant terms may be adjusted, if the Coordinator
                decides this to be necessary in a given emergency context.
                4.16 Grants for underfunded emergencies shall fund core emergency humanitarian
                activities, which shall normally be implemented within nine months following the
                disbursement of funds by the Fund’s secretariat. At the discretion of the Coordinator,
                the grant terms may be adjusted, if the Coordinator decides this to be necessary in a
                given emergency context.
                4.17 In the event that a project or programme approved by the Coordinator is
                cancelled, suspended indefinitely before its completion or otherwise not implemented
                within the specified time frame, the eligible organization shall immediately contac
                the Fund’s secretariat and arrange a viable solution, which may include the return of
                funds, taking into account all agency legal obligations, or other solutions deemed
                appropriate by the Coordinator, including no-cost extensions.

                Resources for the grant element of the Central Emergency Response Fund
                4.18 For the purpose of replenishing the grant element, the Secretary-General may
                convene an annual pledging conference, in addition to holding other events. Member
                States, the private sector, individuals and other entities, as deemed appropriate, shall
                be invited to participate and contribute.

                Section 5
                Accountability and oversigh
                Reporting
                5.1 Eligible organizations shall take full responsibility for the use of and reporting
                on all funds disbursed under the Fund and shall comply with the following
                requirements:
                     (a)    Financial reporting:
                     (i) A financial report for each grant as at 31 December, certified by the chief
                     financial officer, shall be submitted to the Controller by 15 February of the
                     following year;
                     (ii) A midyear financial reporting requirement specific to funds disbursed for
                     rapid response purposes shall be specified in the exchange of letters, as
                     appropriate, at the discretion of the Coordinator;
                     (b)    Narrative reporting:
                     (i) An annual narrative report produced at the headquarters level, as well as
                     additional information on the use and results achieved (as needed) for reporting
                     to the General Assembly, shall be submitted to the Coordinator in accordance
                     with the deadlines set in the narrative reporting framework;
                     (ii) Inputs at the field level on the use of and results achieved with Fund
                     resources shall be submitted to resident coordinators or resident/humanitarian

6/8                                                                                                        21-12609
                                                                                                      ST/SGB/2020/5

                coordinators and the Coordinator, in accordance with the deadlines and
                processes set in the narrative reporting framework.
           5.2 Resident coordinators or resident/humanitarian coordinators shall oversee the
           monitoring of and narrative reporting on projects funded by the Fund. In this regard,
           resident coordinators or resident/humanitarian coordinators shall submit a narrative
           report on the use of such funds and results achieved with funding, based on inputs
           received from eligible organizations at the field level, in accordance with the
           deadlines and processes set in the narrative reporting framework.
           5.3 The Secretary-General shall report with the regularity requested by the General
           Assembly to enable it to provide overall policy guidance and make recommendations
           to strengthen the functioning of the Fund, in accordance with Assembly resolutions
           46/182, 60/124 and applicable subsequent resolutions.

           Return of funds
           5.4 Unless provided otherwise by its internal financial regulations and rules, the
           eligible organization shall return a portion of the unencumbered balance for each
           grant with an expired implementation period, along with the interim financial
           statement for the grant. The portion of the unencumbered balance to be returned shall
           be specified in the exchange of letters. All remaining unspent funds for each gran
           shall be returned with the final financial report for that grant.
           5.5 If any eligible organization fails to return unspent funds, fails to use Fund
           resources for the purposes for which they were approved, or fails to meet the financial
           or narrative reporting requirements described above, the Coordinator may decide to
           suspend further funding to that eligible organization.

           Audits
           5.6 Eligible organizations that have received a loan or a grant shall comply with
           their own financial regulations and rules, including their own internal and external
           auditing procedures and internal arrangements regarding audits of implementing
           partners. If an audit report contains observations specific to the contribution of the
           Fund, the eligible organization shall communicate the recommendations and the
           eligible organization’s responses to the Coordinator.

           Evaluations and other measures
           5.7 The Coordinator shall commission independent, retrospective and substantive
           evaluations of the functioning and utilization of the Fund, as needed. The Coordinator
           also may decide to undertake other reviews and/or assessments or put in place other
           performance and accountability measures, as the Coordinator deems appropriate on
           the basis of the performance and accountability framework for the Fund.
           5.8 Eligible organizations shall participate in any evaluation or review of the Fund
           and shall comply with measures included in the Fund’s performance and
           accountability framework.
           5.9 Pursuant to Secretary-General’s bulletin ST/SGB/2008/5, General Assembly
           resolution 70/286 and the report entitled “Special measures for protection from sexual
           exploitation and abuse: a new approach” (A/71/818), eligible organizations that have
           received a loan or a grant shall adhere to the United Nations policy of zero tolerance
           of sexual exploitation and sexual abuse.
           5.10 The dedicated Fund website shall continue to contribute to improved
           accountability and transparency by providing, inter alia, information on the utilization
           of the Fund and donor contributions.

21-12609                                                                                                        7/8
ST/SGB/2020/5

                Section 6
                Advisory group
                     The Secretary-General shall appoint an advisory group comprising up to 19
                independent experts who broadly represent the humanitarian community. The
                advisory group, through the Coordinator, shall provide the Secretary-General with
                broad policy advice on the implementation of the Fund’s mandate as a whole,
                including on the speed and appropriateness of its allocations. The advisory group shall
                examine the Fund’s performance and reporting mechanisms in order to ensure
                accountability and transparency.

                Section 7
                Final provisions
                7.1   The present bulletin shall enter into force on the date of its issuance.
                7.2   Secretary-General’s bulletin ST/SGB/2010/5 is hereby abolished.

                                                                            (Signed) António Guterres
                                                                                     Secretary-General




8/8                                                                                                       21-12609
